# Summer Proposal

So, these are the areas that I need help/ think the company could grow (there is probably more to add to this but these are what come to mind first)

- Company structure - I think this is pretty good and works fairly well, although I have never really had support from someone at a properly senior level, and the company has definitely grown to the point now where I need this. I’ve always focused on building the team from entry level upwards but there are more of us now + more clients and it’s incredibly important to me that I have someone at the top who I trust. Aside from that, I am sure the whole company set up, day-to-day practices and even billing structure could really benefit from a fresh set of eyes.

- General day to day management of/ support for the team - all the team have set titles/ roles as well as someone who they report into, and have a weekly catch up with. Additionally Soph has been pretty good at doing one on ones with the team (as I do too), but having another senior and more level headed person than me (!!) would help massively. There are also structures in place of how I like us to work in terms of when we deliver schedules/ approvals/ content briefs, but a lot of the time deadlines are missed which is generally due to client chaos. I am sureee there is a better way to streamline

Combing both the above points. You’re clearly a well loved and respected boss, you can see that in the happiness of the staff and the main positioning you want is not to have the total reliance of all of that on you either. It’s important to have that hierarchy structure, which can alleviate some of the pressures of daily work that staff experience be shared throughout a level of management rather than it immediately being cycled up to you.

- Bigger activations/ wider strategy - we have historically been so good at this and I do think it’s one of the things that really sets CYOA apart from other agencies. These days the bigger picture can easily lost to just hammering TikTok. Our roster is really varied so I want to make sure we continue to put energy into say a big activation for Liam or blur that’s actually fun and exciting, in addition to making sure Mae/ Caity/ Cian is posting a TikTok every day

This is effectively the area i’m going to be focussing on – working with artists and teams to develop and execute interesting and lasting ideas. I feel like we did this with slowthai so incredibly well – 99p tour / £1 / £5 tour. Postcards to fans for album announcements, Whatsapp group before services like Community and Laylo existed, Nothing Great About Britain billboards, Something Great About Britain mirrors, amazing merch etc. TT has its place and when it can scale it’s payoffs are huge but the tide has already shifted – we have always known and should never forget that we want to give fans a reason to talk about an artist and that is about marketing them in ways that create lasting remarkability. It needs to be built into the artist, non-transferable marketing that can only come from the artist in question because they’re a one of one. 

New services/ expansion. This is probably of more interest...

I think where we have fallen slightly behind vs other agencies is with some of the add ons that are probably fairly simply to execute. I think there is a massive chance to boost revenue here without requiring the same resource that we do managing day-to-day on projects. If we could combine the below with what we are already doing I think CYOA would legit be miles ahead of everyone else.

Some of these are below, but open to any other areas

- TikTok content capture - have been talking about this for about a year. Similar to SS / benchmob, building a team of freelancers who are amazing at content capture and can be sent to shoots/ events etc. Content ideas and execution will continue to be overseen by account managers but being able to send people out without putting pressure on the existing team would be an easy win. I think there is also the opp to do this on more of a one off basis too for clients who don’t want day-to-day but just want a list of ideas + content capture for a day. Usually we charge from 350 - 500 per day to just capture content but I think we could get away with more if we are doing a better job than anyone else in terms of ideas/ brief

Obviously this was a key part for Disclosure in the run up to album. We had a concentrated period of activity which meant we had an option to capture a lot in a short space of time and this approach likely wouldn’t be the norm. I only see this becoming more of a key pillar of content generation as we run into the ever decreasing returns on influencer campaigns and the need to diversify content. As you say, having a team you can tap into that doesn’t rely on the existing staff is of benefit here. It should be a number of regular freelancers, some who work in a specific genre perhaps know that a Baebadoobee show is going to be different from a Disclosure show. Establishing a format of pre- and post-show workflow if this is engaged by the client. The Identify the deliverables, turnaround, and then whether there’s add-ons such as edits if they don’t just want the raw content. Extending beyond this it taps into somewhere like Loudly or Round, which we’ve had experience these last few weeks. Definitely something to build out.

- Discord - from my experience working with them Leveller manage to charge a lot, without actually doing a lot. This seems like an easy win. Alex is really great with Discord already but would definitely need support to build/ execute Discord servers and strategies

I feel there’s a few layers here to how this can be developed under CYOA. You need to consultancy layer, IE Alex’s expertise in being able to provide the overview and analysis of whether the artist will need it and what they need to benefit from it. You then need to establish one or two mods to run it – we found these easily for Disclosure as we already had the community being built from Twitch but there’s people out there moderating as a job so not that difficult to find people to work across multiple artists. My understanding is that this is what Levellr do – go out and find the mod as opposed to doing it themselves. The next layer is the data / dashboard and essentially that’s where Levellr are winning out. From my introduction to it and Will’s it’s not as impressive as it may seem. You can get various levels of data such as email addresses but as there’s no way to opt into marketing then technically that violates GDPR rules. Secondly, why do you need their email if you can already reach them on Discord. The other data they have are things we can obtain from various plugins in which to reward the community. Without getting too much into it i feel this is something which can be explore, again like the content capture team – it’s about establishing what the offering is and the workflow for making it work effectively and something you can charge more for. Certainly something Lew has knowledge on too and that we could map out.

- CRM - specifically whatsapp and Laylo. Again, feels like an easy win in terms of an add on that will make sense for a lot of clients without a ton of heavy lifting

There’s going to be lots of these popping up – Patrick says he wants to bring his team over in September and do a hackathon with us to build out the Whatsapp messaging service. Feel like we can get in here early with him to build out these tools. He’s of course going to monetise these down the line but we’d get access to the alpha / betas. Strong selling point to clients. Aside from Patrick i think just generally being across these services as they develop is important. For what i want to do it’ll be an important part of my knowledge base – connecting with these people and i can be disseminating this information to you / the CYOA team. There’s services like Medallion and  Highlight etc which again I’ll be wanting to be across as they develop and we can be feeding this through to the team to ensure everyone is aware of what’s out there and what can be an additional service to clients. 

- Content creation - we have Sam and Sophie S but they are at capacity. Similarly to the TikTok thing I would love to have a bank of creatives we can call on to create ad suites etc. We can charge anywhere between 350-1000 for these depending on what’s required. Again this is just a case of finding the right people and then Sam would oversee/ ensure quality control

Are you wanting to recruit here or have people on a freelance basis? Lew has usually been good at finding these people and he’s done a few callouts to build is creative contacts across the board. He’ll be looking to expand that contact base so this area should be of focus also. I’m told F.That rely on freelancers but it looks like it’s positioned as a staff based company.