# Knowhere

- The case for forgoing TikTok influencer agencies
    - Who knew that on February 24th, 1989, *“Fifty-four degrees on a slightly overcast day. Weatherman said rain. If you could get paid that kind of money for being wrong sixty percent of the time, it’d beat working.”*
    - Our rule of thumb in the music industry usually defaults to 20%. 20% engagement on a post, 20% open rate of an email. Success, so by agent Dale Cooper’s standards. You don’t need a weather man to know which way the wind blows. Except with TikTok, we do and we’ll pay
- whats the objectives? Label or independent artist? Latter could get a deal (link to the Vox video). If you had that kind of money maybe don’t sign too quickly. Maybe the agencies should begin signing artists?
- What does success look like?
- Derek Thompson virality rules and how TikTok supercharges the process
- The overwhelming share of voice it takes in meetings. NMF before it, blogs / Pitchfork before that, Zane Lowe, NME before that
- # of songs that reached top 20 because of TT
- Artists that have had success with agencies that aren’t already established
- Unpredictable – we’re happy to pay someone to figure it out
- Authenticity – it’s clever, when left up to the influencers to make content, it is indeed authentic.
- 7,000,000 paid out to 100,000 creators… on average works out at $70 each (Fast Company)
- Customisation of campaign:
    - Budget, projected number of submissions, projected number of views, specific hashtags, specific caption, tag other accounts
    - The customisation is great if you know how to start a trend. What’s the success rate of starting trends?
    - if you don’t know how to start a trend, go with an open brief
- Initiate a campaign when the trend is already under way ([Feist example](https://www.zebr.app/feist-1234-universal-music-catalogue))
- Google results are line by line of “the best TikTok influencer agencies of 2023”
- It’s not just the TT campaign, once it begins to move it’s on the label and artist to capitalise on it
- The algorithm is democratic
- Influence marketing isn’t new but we still focussed heavily on gaining followers but do followers really matter on TT when only XX% of your posts reach them? Get a pool of 10 artists % rates – will stay anonymous
- It does work, clearly but enough for it to be considered a science or is the hit rate similar to that of the wave of the golden hand of the algorithm
- Are we over thinking it, perhaps it’s not about these agencies creating the trends but simply being a database gatekeeper to influencers in a streamlined and automated rolodex, think of them like a more refined extension of your followers – [LF System](https://www.zebr.app/lfsystem-affraid-to-feel-zebr-tiktok-influencer-campaign)
- Not all creations are created equally – Zebr quote of 200K UGC and being #1 on the UK chart whereas Nemahsis peaked at 860K creations and while it doubled her Spotify streams, they still were only peaking around 11K a day. Rarely is anything in a vacuum. Although we don’t know where these we located… all i the UK?
- What else can you get for your money?
- The pay off can be a hit, or can it? What is trending and where is it in the global charts?
- Share of voice / unfair allocation of resources
- [Boy’s A Liar](https://musically.com/2023/04/05/behind-the-single-pinkpantheress-ice-spice-boys-a-liar-pt-2/):
    - Interestingly, the label team was waiting for the TikTok sound to hit the 10k mark in terms of creations before they decided whether this was a record that had the real capacity for growth and one they wanted to move forward with. Once it hit 10k, they launched an official sound and worked from there to get to a point where there were over 50,000 creations and then launched the record on 30th November 2022. User creations grew very quickly off the back of the organic sound that PinkPantheress put out, and the artist’s organic content around that sound also helped lift the trend. Nine days before the release
    - “drove the trend via influencer content”, “Then there was a continuation of the creations through a multi-market creator campaign on TikTok”.
- Tom March “make it go viral”
- To conclude: what you are and what you’re not getting?
    - Not getting: a guaranteed success
    - Getting: an amplification, maybe even a seed, a expertise of knowing when to trigger a doubling down
    - Even TT would advise to attach yourself to a trend
        - they even provide you with hashtags they’re supporting that week but these aren’t trends
- we buy our way out of the problem. When we’re dying of thirst we’ll drink anything and when someone comes along and claims to have the solution, well, what’s three thousand pounds? It’s not unlike a placebo, we tell ourselves we’ve addressed a problem in the short term, only to undervalue the long term when it doesn’t work out.
- Not so much that these services don’t work but it’s when they work, when to engage them
- We’re all by an large cause and effect human beings. We do this and expect that and we haven’t had it so good as we do now with all our access to data. However it feels like it’s never been so clear with TikTok and the halo effect it has on uplifting streams. It doesn’t take a raging capitalist to put it all on red when you see one data point correlating with another.
- Lizzie McAlpine creations and chart peak to research
- Highlight the unpredictability, the ambiguity
- It’s all in the trend
- The chaos of the platform can be exploited by those that talk good game
- In the way iTunes unbundled the song from the album, TikTok has unbundled the song from the artist - and that poses a new problem, how, when a song goes viral, used in videos by in the hundreds of thousands and even the millions of people do you connect it back?
- TikTok is popular because they have created an environment for their influencers to flourish.
- The rules of the trend are to use the song - again are they hear for the song? It’s lean back, it’s what we’re doing while we’re doing something else. But it just work as people then do go onto listen. Pizza Slime and Rae Sremmurd Black Beetles
- The rules still apply, if you engaged an influencer campaign where someone had 10 followers the % for exposure is of course going to be far slimmer than someone with 100k, that barely needs suggesting
- What TT has done is create a world where the opportunity for virality is supercharged - those one-to-one broadcasts add up so significantly and identifies as trends is accelerating popularity quicker than ever before. So the rules by and large are still relatively the same, a one-to-many broadcast is more effective than a a few one to one broadcasts. What we’re really talking about here is the trend and the power of that trend; how to start it, when to start and whether you can even start it at all. It would be easier to suggest you hijack a pre-existing one but you risk your song being out of context with the trend which pushes the music tp be even more of a secondary to the trends content. You also need to get in there early, as to the Blaxk Beatles example - it needed to be established that the song was used otherwise did it even count? However
- However these trends do start from such humble beginnings as a few one-to-one posts, based of a simple lyric or dance routine based around what can easily be an unknown song or a catalogue one for that matter. But the unpredictability is where lies the difficulty in unlocking the power of TT. It doesn
- It doesn’t all have to be trends, the gargantuan success of Smith’s Unholy didn’t have a routine, the majority of the posts were simply people reposting the original sound and it going from there. But Sam is another case in point of a one-fo-many broadcast, they have Xxx followers.
- It is worth pointing out though that while the one-to-many approach is likely to yield greater results, it’s never a given. Such as the way artists of Sam’s heights doing always have number ones.
- The trend, while made of millions of videos of many one-to-few posts, is actually the one-to-many broadcast. It’s consolidated and presented, providing the Super Bowl half time moment where everyone can centre around one thing and see it. Popularity begets popularity -
- So we know the power of a trend but how do we create one. And there was enough consistency to know then those running agencies would be millionaires (maybe they are?), maybe the agencies would be signing artists to use their songs to create the trends and enjoy the revenue caused by the halo effect when the songs are successful Hits. Again, another simplification as a hit needs more than tiktok. Maybe TikTok themselves would create the trends but like us, they’re waiting to see what moves, letting the algorithm do its job.
- This wait and see approach is echoed in a recent breakdown of Boy’s a Liar. While we know that followers on the platform aren’t the power of where TT lies, average stat of 10 posts with someone over 1m followers, the opportunity for content to resonate is of course going to be higher, and likely more favoured than someone with only 10 followers. But what is highlighted is the testing approach, they waited to see what moved and then they engaged.
- They didn’t engage an agency to START the song’s momentum, they waited and used it to amplify. This could explain why many of these agency websites show examples of their work to be stars already. What is committed over and over is the assumption that engaging an agency from nothing is a recipe of success. Show me the artists that have been developed from day one, not those that already had the momentum. But they’re forgiven as that’s what we all need to understand, such is a chaos
- Putting yourself in the way of luck - which is where we think the agency will come into play

---

- Press can’t follow radio
- Books and their themes relating to music marketing
    - paradox of choice: merch, TLDR generation
    - Marginal gains: everything

- DSPs competing features not good for artists
- Why U.K. rap doesn’t work in America
- Following the numbers instead of our instincts: IE not trusting our ears “my gut has shit for brains”
- Meaningful Metrics: focusing on megaphone strategies to begin with… socials, playlists; places with wide funnel openings that can respond to the signal and then it has to flip to more important places, consolidating fans into meaningful areas to speak and sell to them
- How ‘Deluxe’ are we talking? thoughts, ideas, offerings and strategy of releasing
    - price drops
    - merch
    - signed vs unsigned
- Underdog - who is the villain
- Albums: what’s the number of albums released, reviewed, via chart each year. Daft Punk made videos for songs up to 3 years post-album release. Compete with amazing albums. But will the landscape - media, streaming and even labels allow it? The Weeknd maintains it - what’s his timeline from last promotional element to next album?
- I’m excited. Are you excited?
    - The ridiculousness of social captions
    - Meekz wins
- 
- Failing
    - Show up, don’t wait, MVP. Don’t wait for inspiration, do the work,
    - The graph doesn’t trend upwards
- Music and AI
    - Why we need the ecosystem more than ever
    - If we’re struggling who to trust we need the filters… PR, Radio
    - Parallels between AI and Sampling
    - History of a musical brand - Benji B and his Night Slugs episode, commenting on it “taking him back” and the last time they profiled Night Slugs. Will ‘we’ be talking about the nostalgia of the Pollen playlist?
    - Preservation of culture
    - Yasin Bey quote of art and confederate money, where art outlives
    - How will we emotionally respond to the idea an AI is singing to us or written the lyrics? Is it idealistic? Indie versus pop, queen va Beyoncé. What about an uncredited singer on a dance track?
    - Midnatt virtual artist from HYBE
    - HYBE’s BTS was on hiatus, members on military service - a virtual artist doesn't have that issue.
    - Spotify AI DJ - radio is dead (old dance editor quote but now they’re reinventing the DJ).
    - John Peel AI DJ
    - AI will be normalised and our use of it as a language will naturally gravitate to the background - much in the same way the ‘Wallet’ has regarding blockchain
    - AI has the ability to streamline and we’ve seen how music discovery can be streamlined thanks to an algorithm. What are the use cases for AI as N assisted tech, not as generative songs which where the bad rep is going to come from
    - We need real filters to ensure quality, even more so in the face of more and more music being uploaded. If we focus the money through user-centric models we remove the incentive for endless AI music and passive listening at scale
    - Liken it to sampling and the rise of hip-hop, liken it to Spotify being built on an illegal catalogue.
- Streaming - listening to a playlist, a song you like is played and you’d like to hear more by that artist, click a button to cue up another that will play next but not break your flow in the playlist. The playlist will resume its playlist order after the second song has played.