# Bio

### Adam’s Draft

Drawing on inspiration from his perspective of the world around him, Joe James has developed a skill of painting extremely vivid and raw pictures with his songs. The best stories pull from the original experiences of the storyteller and it’s in Joe’s lyrics that you’ll find an emotional depth that feels both sonically nostalgic yet challenging and progressive. While music offers a form of escapism, for Joe it’s an exploration inwards, a way to bring clarity to his feelings and thoughts. It’s in this approach to songwriting that Joe will find that freedom.

Growing up in Essex, Joe would travel back and forth between family homes in Southend-On-Sea and London, both the East end and and westWest side of the city. Joe’s upbringing was by no means your typical childhood, moving house a total of 15 times as a kid. It became routine to pack everything up and move on. While no doubt unsettling, Joe became accustomed to the unpredictability of it and learned to treat each change as an adventure, a new environment with new things to experience and new stories to tell.

That involuntary nomadic lifestyle isn’t without it’s influence though and increasingly with each move Joe would regularly get into trouble; being expelled from multiple schools, reprimands from the police and eventually, at 13 years old, an admission to a secure facility for children based in Birmingham. However, Joe being Joe, he’d learned that this was just another challenge, another new environment, with new people and an opportunity for new experiences, ones that would ultimately go on to be portrayed in the music we hear from him now.

For a life of instability at such a young age it would be difficult to find a point of course correct but Joe’s enlightened maturity took everything and channelled it into the lyrical dexterity he offers today. Whereas many artists would glorify an adolescent misspent youth, Joe approaches it with reflection. It’s this internalisation where Joe finds his clarity. Through songwriting, pausing to breathe, joe weaponises all of that unrest into the positive where he speaks on the importance of health, wealth, exercise connecting with nature. 

In 2020 Joe released his first proper body of work, a compilation of freestyles recorded over a two week period. Only a couple of months later he featured childhood friend KwolleM’s project ‘c2c’, named after the train line connecting Essex to the East end of London. With KwolleM hailing  from Newham this duality was the perfect marrying of their two worlds. Songs like Fenchurch Street and Basildon exemplify Joe’s storytelling, all to the the backdrop of 140BPM grimey production, majestically navigating the instrumentals in what will become a trademark unorthodox and abstract style.

Joe’s love of music traces back to being a toddler, his mum regularly playing garage and R&B through to him performing grime sets at just ten year’s old. All of this sonic exposure bears it’s influence on the release of his debut mixtape ‘Joetry’ in January 2021, a breakthrough for Joe littered with classic R&B samples. Subsequent releases ‘Polythene Gucci Belt’ and ‘Mate In 5’ took in jazz influences as much as his love of R&B but what was quickly becoming apparent was  inarguably identifiable trademark voice. Direct and assertive as equally as it is comforting, it’s this vocal style that creates an irresistibility that keeps you hanging off every verse.

Releasing a total of 8 projects across 2022 and 2023, describing Joe’s work ethic as prolific is an understatement. This enviable output is all Joe, he wants to release music as he makes it, capturing a moment when his introversion hits upon the clarity of his emotions. “*I think there is something very honest and liberating about that, when I find that moment of enlightenment, I want to share that honesty immediately*”. 

### Joe’s Draft

Pulling inspiration from his perspective on the world around him, Joe James paints extremely vivid and raw pictures with his words, so vivid they tend to remain cemented in the listeners ear, in a poetic sense, each Joe song is decorated with his broad vocabulary and intricate word play, Raw and emotional undertones reflect joes personality, in a way that’s fresh but somehow still sonically nostalgic, unapologetic lyrics, sometimes with completely no regard for conforming to any type of song structure Joes music can make for a lyrically dense listen, but the lyrics are so good nobody is complaining, which in someways is what is so enticing about jumping into Joes world, for some artists music is a form of escapism but for Joe it’s more of a look inwards at feelings and thoughts.

Growing up in Southend on sea Essex and going back and forth from Southend to families houses in the east end and west side of London, Joes upbringing was definitely interesting, moving house a total of 15 times as a kid, packing everything up and seeing new things and new environments was definitely something Joe became accustom to,

Joe was in getting into trouble regularly as a kid, and ended up getting excluded from multiple schools, getting in trouble with the police and eventually winded himself up in a secure centre for children in Birmingham, here Joe was around people from all walks of life and all over the country, As a young 13 year old boy being exposed to such a variety of characters was definitely interesting and eye opening which you can hear reflected through the music

Joe speaks about his involvement in skullduggery as an adolescent in a beautifully pensive manner, almost from a point of enlightened reflection as opposed to from a place of Glorification, (INSERT EXAMPLE LYRIC HERE) After a close listen to Joes music you can definitely hear that he has seen some things, and had some insane experiences but the overall tone and message to joes music tends to be a positive one, speaking  about things like Health, Wealth, Exercise and connecting with nature, all things Joe holds dear to him, you can see that life imitates art and Joes art most certainly imitates his life.

In 2020 Joe released his first body of work which was a compilation of freestyles he had recorded over a 2 week period, then a couple of months later he was heavily featured on him and childhood friend “Kwollem”’s project c2c, c2c being the train line that connects Essex to the east end of London, and with kwollem hailing  from Newham this was the perfect marrying of the two worlds, with songs like Fenchurch Street and Basildon, Joe tells the vivid stories of his experiences growing up accompanied by Grimey production at 140 BPM Joe majestically rides the instrumentals in his usual unorthodox and abstract manner

January 2021 Joe released his debut Mixtape “Joetry” a fan favourite, prior to this Joe had been making music for a few years but was still finding his sound, Joe has always loved poetry and writing since a child and would write stories even as a kid, doing grime sets as young as 10 years old Grime was always going leave its imprint on Joes sound, with his mother playing garage and R&B when he was just a small toddler also leaving a subconconcious impression on him sonically, this is evident through the sonics of the masterpiece Joetry which was a breakthrough project for Joe, sampling R&B classics with no regard for sample clearance Joe says “if they want to sue me they can sue me, the music still gonna stand the test of time and that’s all that matters” after Joetry came out with songs like “Polythene Gucci Belt” and “Mate In 5” it was evident that Joe had started to find his sound, soulful and beautifully colourful non conformist production sprinkled with undertones of R&B and Jazz throughout accompanied by the striking juxtaposition of Joes Bass heavy smooth almost “Barry White” esque voice

Joe being Joe has always loved music of all kinds and with his lyrical skill it would be a waste for him to box himself in to just one type of genre sonically, Joe releasing a total of 8 projects across 2022 and 2023 all with different soundscapes but somehow still having that Joe James feel synonymous throughout, “Pure Connery” Smooth and sometimes completely  drumless instrumentals which Joe skips across effortlessly still sounds good next to something like “BRUCE” or “Skullduggery”

Impossible to reduce down to one style sonically. Joe is prolific and his music is a stream of consciousness, sonically dancing in and out of different soundscapes from project to project, Joe has always said he likes to release music as he makes it because usually it reflects his emotions and perspective on the world at that time, I think there is something very honest and freeing about that and that word is definitely something that rings true throughout joes music… Honesty.