# Transport For Humans

Homo economicus, a long-running academic joke, refers to an idealized species of beings who make decisions using rational cost-benefit analysis in an environment of perfect trust, fully aware of all the available options, acting purely in their own self-interest. Outside of academia these conditions exist rarely, if ever. However, there was one place where Homo economicus has thrived: in economic models. The species persists because it has made the modelling of complex human decisions possible for economists. P13/14

Behavioural science is a map, not an instruction manual. All maps are simplifications and behavioural science is no different.
The value is in making the incredibly complex mind more naviga-ble. It is best consulted alongside engineering, economics and marketing, not as their competitor or replacement. Behavioural science fills in blind spots and adds colour to what existing maps leave out. It can add a diagnosts to existing reasoning, detecting potholes, dead ends and icebergs ahead, and creating new and alternative routes. This is true regardless of what happens in the world. Behavioural science has relied upon the scientific method (itself only five centuries old) to establish the facts about how people perceive, think, feel and behave. Only in the past decades has the wealth of evidence accumulated and been made accessible to solving real-world challenges. P35

David Ogilvy, who founded the company we both work for, disagreed: "People don't think what they feel, don't say what they think, and don't do what they say, he
once said.
Experimental psychologists and neuroscientists have shown that we are poor reporters of our own behaviour: we suffer from Illusions of explanatory depth (we think we know more than we do),* choice blindness (we believe we can explain why we chose something)" and false memories (we remember things that happened inaccurately)." The real why differs from the official
'why', and our evolved rationality is very different from the economic idea of rationality. P42

The economist Torsten Veblen coined the term 'conspicuous consumption' in 1899 in his book The Theory of the Leisure Class.
He argued that we spend more money than seems rational on
'positional goods': things that we acquire to demonstrate or achieve social status. This idea can be expanded to behaviour: think of things that we don't need to do - things that, in a narrow rational framework, aren't the most efficient actions to take - but that reveal something about our character to others.
The more public the behaviour, the more powerful the signal. 4
Trains and planes enable costly signalling by selling premium tickets - these are Veblen goods. Now we can entertain the idea that public transport can be comfortable and indulgent: bigger seats and tables show social status during and after the journey (a fact enhanced by social media). A cunning innervation is already in place to harness signalling as a way to increase the status of the electric car as a signal that the driver cares for the environment. An idea from the Behavioural Insights Team in 2020 led to the UK government changing the number plates on battery-powered electric vehicles from yellow to green. It's now as obvious as a peacock's tail when you car is electric, helping to give the EV transition extra visibility and transparency. P60

Reframe value
A £5,000 season ticket need not be seen as a cost when it is instead framed as an investment. It unlocks access to better-paying jobs and to bigger houses and gardens. If one could buy a new-build home located close to a popular station with a three-year season ticket built in to the purchase price, then, relative to the cost of the house, the price of the season ticket would feel like an investment rather than a painful extra cost. Even better, employers could provide loans or subsidies for those working flexibly. P90

- Waiting drags. A review of seventeen studies covering four countries showed that, on average, a minute of waiting time feels like three minutes compared with time spent travelling.
- Walking feels long. Time spent walking feels twice as long as the same time using other transport modes.
- Calm ambience shrinks time. Recent virtual reality testing has discovered that dimmer lighting with a warmer hue reduces our perception of waiting times. * Relaxing low-tempo music has the same effect.
- Clean train, shorter trip. A recent trial on Dutch train carriages showed that travel time is perceived as shorter when the train is clean. Neat environments reassure us and create a positive emotional state.
- Pastimes pass time. Stimuli like music, advertising and infotainment redirect our attention, leaving less processing capacity to keep an eye on the time, which then seems to pass more quickly.

When we try to save time, we do it wrong. Studies have found that people underestimate the time saved by increasing low speeds, and overestimate the time saved by increasing high speeds? We put our foot down on the motorway, but the real gains come from avoiding queues at junctions. Professional experience does not cure this bias, either: even taxi drivers, who we would assume might have learned from experience, share this cognitive bias. P96/97

Houston airport used to receive persistent complaints about the waiting times at its baggage carousels. Investment in logistics eventually cut the wait to eight minutes, the industry average, but complaints continued. It would have required a large new investment to make delivery faster, if that was even possible.
Researchers then noticed that the gates were located unusually close to the terminal. They decided to extend the distance passengers walked between the gate and baggage claim. Travel-lers now walked a normal distance (which was six times further than before) and complaints dropped dramatically. Time walking felt shorter than time waiting at a stationary baggage carousel. P102

The pursuit of speed for search results has produced counterintuitive effects. When Michael Norton and Ryan Buell studied the flight search engine Kayak, they found that users preferred and valued seeing an animated loading bar scrolling through airline names rather than receiving instant results. Designers call this a 'fake wait' and psychologists call it the 'labour illusion' - people value things more when they perceive that effort has gone into their creation. The same reasoning means that restaurants cannot serve their deserts too quickly, for fear of appearing like fast food. P107

By using norms and emphasizing cooperation, insights from psychology, anthropology and sociology can signpost more powerful forces for change. Our knowledge of the power of societal norms is partly based on the work of Jean Piaget and Lawrence Kohlberg, both developmental psychologists, on how we develop a moral sense of right and wrong." Social norms that persist have peer-to-peer enforcement: in a pandemic, for example, a government temporarily mandates remote working and physical distancing - by law in some cases - but top-down policies become norms only once people feel that their friends or colleagues will not judge them negatively if they follow the new practices. P124

- We all use mental short cuts, rules of thumb and habits when we travel. These well-trodden paths free up mental bandwidth.
- But this leads to us missing opportunities to try something new that could benefit us as individuals and/or could collectively benefit society.
- We don't pick our habits, they pick us. But, as the London Olympics and Covid-19 have shown, people are capable of more adaptation than they expect. P125

Transport needs to be built using quantified units, but it is experienced by humans, not scientific instruments. Concepts like time, cost, comfort, reliability and sustainability are filtered through perception, emotion and beliefs. These are much trickier to measure, so we need to review how and why we set our targets, and we should also consider whether we could be measuring different things - or just not attempting to measure anything at all. P139

“At the federal level, I am a Libertarian. At the state level, I am a Republican. At the town level, I am a Democrat. In my family, l am a socialist. And with my dog, I am a Marxist.”

People are more pluralistic than we give them credit for: their views are not perfectly logical and consistent, meaning they are likely to see international, domestic and local transport quite differently (something politicians learn first hand in their constituency surgeries). The advertising guru Bill Bernbach has said that 'A principle isn't a principle until it costs you something': an insight into why we're happy to consider cycleways or bus lanes in other places but Not In My Back Yard. P180

The phrase 'meet them where they're at' describes the technique of acknowledging existing beliefs and value systems. We hold beliefs partly because they serve a personal purpose, so bombarding us with facts is not an effective way to change our minds. This was already well established in vaccine hesitancy research, so in 2020 the World Health Organization (WHO) applied a strategy of 'pre-bunking, which communicates anticipated concerns ahead of time to build trust and confidence that the authorities are already on the case. The psychologists that authored the report for the WHO make the memorable analogy that pre-bunking is like inoculating people against ensuing fake news. P183/184

The 'hype curve' shows how new technologies start more slowly than insiders expect. Skype started in 2003 and Ocado in 2010, and while the benefits of both were clear from the outset, they saw modest usage until an exogenous shock - the Covid-19 pandemic - acted as a trigger for an explosion in home working and online shopping. Meanwhile, it took Uber many years - as well as questionable business practices and $14 billion in cumulative losses - from its founding in 2009 to gain widespread adop-tion, with dozens of gig-economy and ride-share services also finding that people's aptitude and appetite for smartphone-connected travel fell short of their founders' original enthusi-asm. All three of these companies' innovations rely on scale: the more people who use them, the better, cheaper and more dependable their services get. P198

Diversity is not just an ethical nice-to-have, it is a vital ingredient for high-performing groups. In controlled studies, diverse groups outperform others on problem-solving tasks, creativity and spotting errors. Performance gains are not attributed solely to newcomers who bring new ideas, but also to shifting group dynamics that empower members to think differently? Diverse juries perform better than all-white juries, diverse R&D teams generate more novel solutions, and diverse finance teams value stocks more accurately. P213

Research shows that support and adjustment for non-visible conditions is lacking, * but there is potential for certain job roles to thrive from neurodiverse thinking that generates new per-spectives. Homogeneity extinguishes imagination, while diversity of thought helps to create services that work for all of us.
The disability rights movement has a compelling phrase: 'Nothing about us, without us.' P216

In 1989 research found that people's ability to correctly identify reasons for future outcomes could be increased by 30% using a principle called 'prospective hindsight'. Gary Klein, a psycholo-gist, formalized this into a process called a 'pre-mortem' in 2005.
In a typical planning session, team members might be asked what could go wrong. In a pre-mortem the team starts from the premise it has gone wrong and must reason what went wrong and why. Everyone in the room independently writes down every reason they can think of for the failure - especially the kinds of thing they wouldn't ordinarily mention. The pre-mor-tem's main virtue is that it legitimizes doubts and encourages even supporters of the decision to search for possible threats they had not considered earlier.
Concerningly, the evidence showing the effectiveness of pre-mortems is well established, but they haven't been well implemented. A decade prior to Covid-19, a 2010 study showed how the handling of an epidemic (in this case Swine Flu/H1N1) would be improved if pre-mortem techniques were used." In the first task, 178 participants were split into five strategy teams: normal, critique (red team), cons only, pros and cons, and pre-mortem. Each team had thirty-five minutes to work out how to improve understanding and confidence in the response. The pre-mortem team performed best in both tasks. A follow-up study in 2017 found that a short 5-10 minute pre-mortem process proved as effective as the longer group pre-mortem for generating understanding, proposing solutions and reducing overconfidence. P220

While change is urgent, it will take time for transport technologies to adapt to people. The kernel of this argument was expressed by polymath Alan Turing in 1947. After cracking the enigma code and practically inventing computer science, Turing went on to lay out a vision for the future: 'The machine must be allowed to have contact with human beings in order that it may adapt itself to their standards.* Blessed with insights from behavioural science and observations from the past seventy years, we suspect machines need more quality contact with humans. To harness the power of the evolutionary process, our technologies need exposure to a positive feedback loop that collects human experiences, emotions and values so they can serve the wants and needs of the people being transported and the places being connected. P237/238