# Up Ya Archives

- Cobrand
    - setup
    - data collection
    - club card
        - Fan tiers: bronze, silver, gold
        - NFC reader at shows for access, discounts
        - UYA advanced mailer
        - physical vs digital content
        - offering guaranteed ticket access.
    - Offer physical card (use Arthur Russell card example) for fee (UYA Store, £
- Hotline for fans to call

### Cobrand Slide 1

Our first priority is setting up UYA on Cobrand. One of the central pillars of our approach to the UYA brand is the importance on the community and our ability to seamlessly communicate to them. Cobrand’s tools will allow us to centralise all of this fan data, providing us a number of tools to rank fans based on a number of engagement metrics, from signups, social interactions, streaming behaviour and purchase history. 

1. Establish the UYA Cobrand: CTA for fans to signup to the UYA for updates, exclusive access to content, tickets and more
2. Data collection:
    1. fans signup with email and phone number. Entering their social @’s is optional, previous activations have resulted in a 60% intent 
    2. Signup opportunities include: always on signup, pre-saves for release, ticket pre-sales, merch pre-sales, exclusive content previews
    3. as we begin to collect data across the first 3 months we’ll begin to have identify the most engaged fans across across the above metics including how they interact with UYA socials
    4. We can tier fans within Cobrand into those who are the most valuable to UYA versus those who are just joining the family. These can be determined in a number of ways and can dictate the level of access they receive
    5. outreach: we will use this CRM to communicate news on releases, shows, and product as the primary means for developing a loyal UYA following. Specific emphasis on this area will ensure that fans feel valued and rewarded. This in-turn will create the urgency we desire in each UYA area when it comes to a release; records, tickets and product
3. In addition to the CRM functionality we will be monitoring UYA release performance daily to identify opportunities for amplifying content using UYA sounds
4. Outlined on the Socials Strategy page, Cobrand call also be used as an effective content distribution platform to seed through to respective jungle, DnB and related dance genre channels

### Cobrand Slide 2

UYA Club Card: We have secured advanced access to a new Cobrand function that will allow us to deliver a downloadable club card that fans can add to their iPhone and Android wallets.

1. After fans save the card in their wallet we can deliver push notifications to fans at a fraction of the cost of sending an SMS or WhatsApp. Release and show news, ticket pre-sale links, advance release content, product discount codes – all delivered as a priority to the UYA community
2. Like other wallet cards, the UYA club card can be physically scanned with an NFC reader to verify a fans eligibility – this could be entry into special events, discounts at the merch stand at shows
3. This extra level of customisation provides opportunity for UYA to set itself aside from other artists and brands who will compete within fan’s messaging spaces (arguably why Instagram broadcast channels haven’t stuck… mixed in with everyone’s DMs)
4. Card design can be customised per tier to effectively illustrate what tier a fan belongs to and when a fan moves from one tier to another
5. Based on our self-determined customised tier system we can offer different rewards to the fans. The black card tier could qualify for guaranteed ticket sales (pre-pre-sales) and 24 hour exclusive access to the dub-plate exclusives product. The gold tier might automatically qualify you to a ticket pre-sales and 24 hour exclusive access window to the general vinyl sale and so on.
6. In addition to the club card system we will have a dedicated number to continue to communicate via SMS and WhatsApp for those who choose not to opt into the wallet card. This phone number can also be the UYA Hotline, which we can use to reveal pop-up show information
7. We propose fans can purchase a personalised physical version as merch in a throwback to original club membership cards 

---

### UYA Hotline

As identified in the Cobrand section, being able to seamlessly communicate with our UYA fanbase is a priority strategy across records, live and product. The UYA Hotline works in addition

---

- Nia to announce each release with video to fans
    - via socials
    - introduction to artist, why she loves them and this record
    - preview a snippet of the dubplate
        - “as ever, we have 100 of these available exclusively to the UYA krew. If you wanna be the first to grab one make sure to signup”
    - Nia playing out to the club as content
        - likewise artists on the release playing it out for content
- Nia VIP mailer
- expresses concern about Tom's desire for the label to be less dependent on Nia, emphasizing the need for Nia to be central to the archives' success.

### Nia Ownership

A fantastic job has been done already with creating an inseparability between Nia and UYA and it’s of priority importance than we build on this and maintain it for the sake of existing fans and as a strategy of turning new audiences into long-time UYA fans. 

1. on simple terms we do this through ownership; Nia’s name is built into UYA and her visibility when it comes to announcing new releases and shows is going to instil the UYA brand in fan’s minds
2. each release should be announced and introduced by Nia on socials – ideally video to camera, announcing the artist and a bit of context about the release along with a preview of the tracks playing
3. The audio could be played from the limited dubplates we issue for each release, which can also double as a CTA for fans to signup to the UYA community *“as ever, we have 100 of these available exclusively to the UYA crew. If you wanna be the first to grab one make sure to signup”*
4. Where possible we have video capture of Nia playing the releases at shows as well as the respective artists of each release to utilise as pre-release content
5. As has already been discussed, we have a systematic servicing process where Nia personally sends the releases to media and aritst VIP’s ahead of release (this can be mirrored by the respective releasing artist also)

---

- Subscription plan
    - access to all stems and a capellas
    - Guaranteed ticket access
    - Guaranteed advance product sale window

### UYA Subscription

By extension to our tiered fan strategy we envisage the potential of developing this into a monthly subscription model. As fans become increasingly loyal to UYA through their streaming, purchases and general engagement there is the upper level of securing a monthly paid subscription that consolidates all of the ongoing rewards of being the most loyal UYA fan through this subscription approach. 

For a monthly fee fans get:

1. **💿 Vinyl:** Every UYA release on vinyl (signed by Nia optional)
2. **🎟️ Shows:** 4x guaranteed ****guestlist spots per year for any UYA show plus exclusive pre-sale access to all other shows
3. **👕 Product:** 2x free t-shirt items per year plus exclusive pre-sale access to all other product drops
4. **👫 Community**: Invite-only Discord or forum to connect with other UYA heads
5. 🔒 **Safehouse**: Website login area with exclusive content such as remixes, demos, stems, AMAs, photos and more

---

- White label / dubs plan

### Dubplates

Always limited these pressings are initiated as soon as mastered audio is delivered, this way we have them in advance of announcing the release.

1. Nia uses them to announce each new release, dropping the needle to preview the track in video content on socials
2. We always reserve 10 copies for giveaways:
    1. 5 copies to new UYA signups (from the moment we announce)
    2. 5 copies randomly given away to existing UYA fans
3. 10 copies reserved for promo to the VIP industry list
4. Remaining copies available to the UYA crew – dictated by fan tiers or future subscription model terms

---

- A capella plan
    - Beatport, SC only

### The Stashbox

We develop an artists and producer’s area to engage this specialised part of the UYA community. This could exist within a specific part of an UYA Discord or likeminded forum to encourage inter-community discussion and collaboration.

1. Limited number of stems and any a cappella versions are available for free download for producers to download (UGC content only, not for commercial release)
2. Fans are encouraged to send in their remix versions for UYA’s A&R team to review, which could lead to club play or potential release 
3. Artists and producers can upload their won demos for UYA to consider for release or club use by Nia

Note on the a capella versions: arguably these appeal more to the aforementioned producer community and if they’re to become a consistent element for UYA releases we’d suggest considering that digital releases of these be reserved for the likes of Beatport, Bleep, Soundcloud, Boomkat, and Juno among others. 

---

- WHP plan – treat as flagship event as a pre-cursor to what an UYA festival would be
- Day parties plan

### Warehouse Project

Given the success of the previous UYA WHP and now the much bigger takeover planned, this provides a distinct opportunity to approach it with a future UYA Festival mindset. We should place particular emphasis on ensuring that this feels like a city-wide takeover, branded in all areas both inside and outside of the Depot.

1. From ticket purchase to show, strategise and curate the experience between these two pillar moments that add value to fans
2. Exclusive events taking place in Manchester both pre-WHP and the weekend of the flagship event:
    1. Curated shows featuring both Nia and the UYA alumni 
    2. Store takeovers with DJ sets and exclusive product sales
    3. UYA Gold tier members receive an sms with invite-only details of an unannounced show
3. Live stream of the night either with a YouTube partner channel or via UYA’s YouTube
4. UYA members are sent a stream of Nia’s set on the Monday following the show

---

- Streaming & radio
    - UYA playlist strategy: ties into radio, ongoing playlists of UYA releases + office stereo (nia da junglist Spotify playlist last updated 19/12/22)
    - UYA radio: guest spots on Rinse, 6Music

### Streaming & Radio Strategy

A consistent presence across DSPs with regularly updated playlists relating to UYA will be of benefit. Not a revolutionary by any means but as DSPs become increasingly reliant on algorithms to aid on-platform discovery, being able to draw lines between UYA releases and “what we’re currently rinsing” type playlists will provide opportunities for engagement.

1. An ongoing UYA Release playlist updated with each new release
2. A general UYA playlist of “what we’re currently rinsing”, new and old (nia da junglist playlist as example)
3. Guest playlist curated by the respective releasing artist on UYA each month (archived for posterity with each new artist)
4. UYA Radio
    1. the above streaming strategy could be branded under a UYA Radio banner by extension of the Nia Archives x Apple Music Club Radio
    2. likewise this this can tie into any Nia guest slots with preexisting stations such as Rinse, NTS, 6Music or UYA residency artists
    3. a longer term strategy (and no small undertaking) could lead into the development of a YouTube channel for periodically filmed radio shows such as The Lot Radio and HÖR for example

---

- TT strategy
    - servicing all relevant channels
    - start network of owned jungle / DnB channels

### Socials Strategy

Without question an important part of any release and overall brand strategy will be how we use UYA socials across the 3 key pillars: records, live, and product.

1. the shop window to all of what is going on with the UYA universe, an always-on approach to news, announcements, live recaps, promo will illustrate the progressive nature of UYA and allowing us to remain front of mind to UYA followers
2. Socials will be a primary area for converting audience into fans. Our knowledge of Cobrand will allow us to ensure we’re maximising engagement and potential in this area for growing the UYA community
3. A dedicated budget towards servicing jungle, DnB, and other dance related genre channels on TikTok and Instagram where we can send pre- and post-release clips of UYA releases in various forms of content types. Most notably live content of the tracks being played out
4. As discussed, there is a longer term strategy where we setup our own dedicated page to cater to jungle and DnB where we can foster a community of fans in addition to UYA.
    1. Instagram & TikTok channels for regular posting of all that is happening in the genre with emphasis on UYA
    2. Reddit page dedicated to foster deeper discussion than the comments on socials

---

- Timeline, one a month with deadlines and key outreach built in
    - outlines the timeline for 10 releases over 10 months, starting with notifying the fan base and building the fan club card.
- Overview:
    - emphasise an approach to grow the archives and the importance of having a growth strategy for all three elements: records, product, and events.
- Take the first release and applying comments and notes, focusing on the timeline and fan club element.
- emphasizes the importance of a 360-degree approach, incorporating records, product, and events to grow the archives

- Pop up event w/ homebass guys or similar nia b2b cheetah
- UYA house bag
- Website archive of all releases and shows (posters) and product

——————————————————————————————————————————————————

Sound system culture

Medallion for label

educational support element

Artists: Goldie, Bryan Gee, DJ Storm, Kemistry, DJ Flight

Notting Hill Carnival

EQ 50 Crew

**What’s the songwriting process like for you? Since some of these songs are pretty personal.**

Yeah, most of them, I’m talking about my life in some way or another, but I kind of like to talk about how I’m feeling as a release for myself. But then I like to disguise that so it’s not so black and white. If I write about myself and then take myself out of it, it’s a bit more relatable to other people, and then other people can listen to it, and it could be about any situation in anybody’s life. So, that’s how I approach writing. I try to write how I would say things. Like “Headz Gone West” is something that I would actually say to some of my friends because it’s a Manchester saying. So I just try to put those little Easter eggs in my writing, and usually, most of the time, I just make the beats first and then write. But there are some songs that kind of wrote themselves, and then I’ve had to build around it.

**Yeah I guess that’s an interesting idea because I think the appeal of your music kind of immediately is the emotional sensibility. And I always wonder this from artists who are good at writing sad songs. What happens once you’re happier?**

Yeah, it’s tough, isn’t it? It’s tough. I think, to be honest, I will say I’m a lot happier now compared to when I wrote my first EP. I’m just the same as everyone else in a sense that people always going to have things that they battle with internally and things that conflicts that might not be able to be resolved and stuff like that. Also, just being 23, I can’t lie this has been the toughest year of my life. Not as in tragedy, just as in genuine personal self-growth and learning about myself, learning about my identity. So there’s so much to talk about in that. And it might not be distraught mental breakdown songwriting, but it’s a lot of learning about myself and kind of exploring that in my writing. But I do, yeah, it sometimes it is hard when you get happy to write a sad song, but I think I kind of draw inspiration from the past quite a lot. So there’s always stuff to talk about and unpack.