# Fan Journey

Type: Framework
Stage: Define / Design
Theme / Topic: Fan Journey, Fans, Growth
Status: Draft

Acquisition; Activation; Retention; Revenue; Referral

- Acquisition: how do people discover you & your music, so Discovery.
- Activation: how do people engage with you, so Engagement.
- Retention: how will people show repeat engagement over time?
- Revenue: where do people spend money directly on you? Merch, tickets?
- Referral: how do people tell others about you? Social, word of mouth?

### Fan Journey Framework

**Step One: Get discovered by new fans**

write down all the likely places people **might** discover your music, be they friend recommendations (through which medium?), recommendation engines (what platforms?), social media e.g. through people sharing your posts, radio airplay (where?), playlists (which? platform?), etc. Try to identify the most important ones today that will still be important 6 months from now.

**Step Two: Engage acquired fans**

For the sake of this example fan journey, let’s say the next step from Discovery is that people Google you on their way to Engagement. What do they Google? If they’ve seen you in a playlist, they might Google your name. If they heard your latest song on the radio, your lyrics or a misspelling of your name. Try it out and see what the search results are like. Will they have to type “music” next to your name to find you as an artist? What are the first results? Note down what you’d ideally like to see here.

A very common Google search results page order for more established artists is: a carousel of videos at the top, then Wikipedia, then your YouTube channel, then your homepage.

If the video carousel is showing, click the top left video. If it’s not, go to your most viewed YouTube video, which is usually the one in these results. The very first result on search pages tends to get the most traffic. It should now be clear for people how they can follow you on YouTube as well as on another platform, such as Instagram. If not, take notes, so you can improve this.

Next, click your Instagram link from the video description. Landing on your Instagram profile, be super critical: how enticing is it? Is it clear to people what they get when they follow you? Does it invite people to engage?

### Step Three: **Retain existing fans**

Once people follow you, recurring engagement (aka retention) will depend on your content calendar. Keep this goal in mind when working on your schedule.