# Principles & Beliefs

Type: Principle
Stage: All
Theme / Topic: Beliefs, Strategy
Status: Canonical

### Word of Mouth

I believe our fans and followers are those which will help us acquire new fans. If there’s a group of 10 friends and 6 of them are fans, the greatest opportunity we have of converting those other 4 are the 6 fans already bought in. Even then let’s apply a 20% variance, we can’t ever convert everyone, so we only need to win over another two of the friends. 6 vs 2 feels like good odds. Essentially what we’re saying is Word of Mouth, as un-revolutionary as that concept sounds. 

*“People don't believe what you tell them. They rarely believe what you show them. **They often believe what their friends tell them**. They always believe what they tell themselves.”* -Seth Godin

---

I believe art gives a voice to the voiceless. It allows us to express ourselves in ways we find difficult. To tell someone how we feel. When you find two or more people who come together because of music in sharing a voice then that’s powerful. Underdog stories that speak truth to power, communicate love when we can’t say it ourselves, it gives strength. It pushes up against the accepted way of doing things, it’s non-conformist, it makes our world more colourful and rich. It inspires conversation and debate, one tiny little song can literally change the course of someone’s life. 

If I can play a small part in that journey by playing around with imaginative and creative ideas that help contextualise and communicate an artist and song to people then that brings me immense fulfilment. 

---

Starting with what you believe is a helpful precursor to finding out your WHY. 

---

Art is enduring - institutions, money, laws, power, these have and will continue to change, yet we look at a picture or hear a song that has continued to be appreciated across generations of these changes. 

Yasiin Bey quote 

But it can be enduring on a personal level. It’s transformative - the emotional attachment we form with a 3 minute piece of music can make us feel 18 again. It brings us back to last summer or 25 summers ago. The people we were with the the places we’ve been. Or the places it will take us - the confidence it gives us to see what world is possible, for us and for everyone. 

---