# Nate Brazier

Main question

Who are his fans

Where are his fans

How do we reach them

What does Nate want his music to mean to people… segue that into above fan questions. 

How do you write a customer profile? Chatgpt 

Objectives

1. Identify the areas where Nate is strong, where his music and artist proposition resonates
2. Does this align with his creative vision and path?
3. Identify the targets to achieve the vision and path
4. Create a strategy to achieve the vision 

**OOO**

An outsiders perspective

time solely dedicated to the creative marketing strategy

This isn’t in isolation – it must work with the other supporting functions

Not wanting to send a PDF of ideas off, we want to be immersed in the development of these ideas so we can adapt intelligently as we develop

Lewis – The REST: 40+ music videos, worked with brands

### Objectives

- Research and analytical:
    - identify the areas in which Nate operates
        - through discussion with the artist
        - through data: Music-Tomorrow, Loudly, Immensity
    - What clusters does his music and his proposition appeal to
    - What creative output is resonating within these segments?
    - We can then better curate the creative output to impact these audience segments
- Create remarkability – things that people want to talk about
    - content, live, PR

### Strong Points

- TikTok
    - well curated
    - aesthetically directed to fit with Nate’s music

### Ideas

- Jewelry collab
- Night bus messaging
- Acapella video – Jamie Woon canoe video ref.
- Artist pool: Jim Legxacy, Wesley Joseph, James Blake
- After party for October 17th show
- Keystroke to access secret part of website
- Whatsapp for advance fans
- Merch - Limited for show, sale on website after
- Dance - can he dance?
    - after party around the corner from Pickle Factory
- Social comments - be more emotive
- Socials team on board - YT Stories
- Audit
- Bandsintown
- Video tags on YouTube upload, vidIQ analysis
- Loudly analysis
- Mav Sabre analysis
- 

### Questions

- if you had to name the fanbase or group of fans, what would it be?
- What do your fans want?

October show TBC

Kick off conversation

Awaiting next few months

Jim 

### Music

Duval Timothy, Mansur Brown, Tyson, Yusef Dayes, Joy O, Cleo Sol, salute, Infinite Coles, Nemahsis COLORS pianist (Charlie) 

Brand the afterparty

Brand the fanbase – what are we giving them?

What do fans tell themselves?

post pandemic world, value intimate connection, slow listening

**Laylo** for Insta top friends – RSVP

Shopify - link merch with Bandsintown and Spotify

Sampha aesthetic content 

The Square deck

---

### Core Question

How do we grow Nate Brazier’s fanbase?

- Continue to engage with existing fans
- Reach new listeners and convert to new fans
- Develop and execute interesting and unique ideas

### Out Of Office

We believe in creating remarkability; instances that create conversation, points of lasting interest which inspire fans to remark more than just the traditional nature of how they interact with an artist and their music. We’re building fanbases and a focus on maintaining them. Fan acquisition needs to be coupled with super-serving those that are already leaning forward. We believe great marketing is non-transferable; taking one artist’s name off and applying another would render the marketing incompatible. As much as executing the most unique and exciting idea is important, marketing is about future-proofing; starting with the good that will lead us to the great. While we bring creativity we also bring perspective. 

### Overview

Nate has already begun successfully establishing a well curated sound and aesthetic. He has an acute understanding of his art, how he wishes this to connect to his fans, and ideas in which to do so. This proposal will provide a brief health check across Nate’s platforms, areas we have identified which would benefit from some small tweaks. We will propose ideas for fan engagement that focus on both existing and engaging new fans. This isn’t a totally exhaustive or career defining roadmap – it’s simply the beginning of what we hope will be a continuous exchange of ideas and artist development.

---

### Existing Fans _ Data Analysis

**co:brand**

Working with co:brand we have access to their suite of tools in advance of public release. With direct integration of Nate’s TikTok and Instagram co:brand will analyse his audience, helping us to identify top fans by way of consistent engagement. We can then begin to segment audiences and message them directly with the co:brand dashboard. This approach automates the direct-to-fan experience for a higher rate of engagement, rewarding those fans who are most loyal. This is just one of the many tools being built by co:brands’ team. 

**Music Tomorrow**

Music Tomorrow’s powerful analytical tool can provide key insight into an artist’s far reaching audience. Their tool operates by identifying clusters of fans, providing a granular understanding to inform both broad and niche areas to focus our marketing. This is a paid for service so would need to be factored into budget.

**Immensity**

An important tool to measure the effectiveness of our marketing and whether we’re reaching our objectives. Immensity’s tool can provide clarity on digital ad spend and its influence on streaming. Likewise it can also assess content to establish what is having the most impact and where. While not in open release we have worked with them previously and can open conversations with them for advanced access. This is a paid for service and would need to be factored into budget. 

---

### Health Check

**YouTube**  

**Shorts** – as one of the primary new music discovery services among Gen Z, Shorts should be heavily utilised with short form content alongside Nate’s TikTok.

**Video Tags** – there’s no tags on Putting In Airs. This should be updated to include artist, track, EP title, similar artists and other related search terms.

**Comments** – Nate to respond to comments, pin his own comment, like comments from fans to aid better engagement.

**End Cards** – add to link back to other Nate related content on YouTube.

**About** – add bio info and social links.

**Spotify**

**Playlist** – periodic updates to his ‘memory of rave’ playlist. This can centre around his current listening but also consider themed editions which draw back into his aesthetic such as ‘night bus home’ edition.

**Single Waterfalling** – Pending any future EP releases where singles are released in advance, consider waterfalling the previous singles to encourage discovery.

**Lyrics** – Ensure all songs have lyrics added. Currently only Teasing The Thread from the Nothing Sacred EP have lyrics.

**Discography playlist** – currently titled ‘[Nate Brazier - Nothing Sacred](https://open.spotify.com/playlist/1GqkJe8YqViS7zz1R69uR6?si=1928a5756135464c)’, as a collection of all Nate song’s released to date. This should be curated under Nate’s profile as opposed to Topsify UK to unify the presentation of his brand as an artist 

**About** – update with more bio info.

**Instagram**

**Schedule** – establish better frequency of posts. There’s significant gaps between Feed posts such as 28 and 32 days. This is based on what’s publicly available, appreciate posts could have been archived and he also spends time posting on stories as opposed to the more curated nature of Feed.

**Reels** – alongside YouTube Shorts consider more content to be posted on Reels. Only one post to date back on Feb 10th.

While Instagram is characterised as an older demographic of fans it’s still unquestionably an important entry point of discovery. Increased post frequency across Feed and Reels will create opportunities for engagement alongside TikTok as Nate’s primary socials outlet.

**TikTok**

**Frequency** – good post frequency and engagement from Nate. Where he responds to comments he should also like the fan comments also. 

**Content** – a good balance between Nate to camera as well as observational. Showing his friends hanging out and going out. Gives a sense of shared community centred around Nate and his music. Ideally would like to see more of Nate playing the piano, emphasising him as a musician as much as a singer.

**Website**

Have a permanent offer for signup - something that fans can get such as 10% merch discount or a stream of a self recorded session or cover song not available elsewhere. 

**Forever Save**

The fragmented nature of fan engagement with new artists means fluctuating performance metrics. A shift to a **forever save** format where fans only need opt in one and all future released are saved to their Spotify library will ensure a higher repeat listener rate. Adopting this approach arguably increases the need for new music messaging to counteract the passivity of the one-time engagement with saving releases.

**Bandsintown**

Create a profile for the Pickle Factory and future events. Currently Nate’s show [isn’t listed](https://www.bandsintown.com/v/10006444-pickle-factory?came_from=257) under The Pickle Factory’s upcoming concerts. There are fan tools such as messaging and Shopify integration.

**Genius**

Ensure all lyrics, artwork and credits are up to date. Nate should contribute annotations to encourage fan participation and conversation.

---

### Merch

**Apparel**

A small run of t-shirts designed solely by Nate or in collaboration with another designer. These should be first made exclusively available at the Pickle Factory show and then any surplus then sold on Nate’s website. Limited runs will keep the items exclusive and play into streetwear culture of which Nate’s fans no doubt subscribe to. These limited runs also allow you to test what designs resonate with fans, future-proofing for further colour-ways and return drops at key points such as album pre-order campaign.

**Jewellery**

Already cleverly incorporated and executed for the announcement of the Nothing Sacred EP, Nate should explore a line of jewellery. While potentially a costly endeavour it would be positioned as a premium item, limited to maintain exclusivity and also future-proofed to lead to collaborations with brands such as [MAPLE](https://www.mapleco.ca/), and [She’s Lost Control](https://sheslostcontrol.co.uk/) down the line. 

---

### London

No doubt Nate draws upon various influences in his music. We identify which the likes of James Blake, Burial and Jamie Woon among others in Nate’s production and vocal. These artists are synonymous with London and a sound indicative of London night time. Similarly Nate’s audience is currently largely London-centric, Instagram followers concentrated to London to the tune of 47% of his following and likewise his top city for Monthly Listeners on Spotify. We propose placing greater emphasis on this approach, encapsulating it further into Nate’s overall aesthetic and presentation. Him attending Notting Hill Carnival is a perfect example of this cultural context. 

Touch points on this approach to include:

- **Locations**: Corsica, Brilliant Corners, Bermondsey Social Club, Laylow, Notting Hill Arts Club, Southbank, Gillet Square, Barbican, Alexandra & Ainsworth Estate, Windrush Square and more to expand upon. These locations should be considered for live appearances, session performances, and settings for content creation and socials posts where Nate can be pictured in key locations, tagging locations on socials to influence the algorithm unearthing content in user’s feeds.

- **Community Radio**: London has a wealth of local radio stations and fittingly work with Nate’s sound and audience. We propose a focus on the following stations: NTS, Kindred, Balamii, Foundation, Reprezent and Threads among others.

- **Transport**: Bus (night bus), tube, Lime bikes; content creation for socials indicative of moving around London.

---

### Night Bus

Inseparably associated with the [Burial song](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yOMBzI66LJU) of the same name, the sonic nature of the track has almost become a genre in its own right; a darker, soulful downtempo sound indicative of the journey after the night out. This aesthetic ties into the London-centric concentration of Nate’s audience, and the Burial influence in his sound. 

**NFC Tags**

Stickers placed at bus within a certain radius of Nate’s debut show at The Pickle Factory (and future shows). These work like a QR code but offer an alternative to the overused black and white square people are becoming increasingly immune to. Scanning the NFC tag can link the fan to exclusive content such as the Night Bus playlist outlined below.

**Night Bus Google Maps Playlist**

Based on Nate’s curated picks (including his own music), a playlist is auto-generated based on the length of time it takes to get the bus home. Google Maps API could be used to determine the journey’s length. This would also benefit from being gated with a signup with email / phone number. It could be an ongoing activation or tethered specifically to after live shows, launched with the aforementioned NFC sticker-tag placed at bus stops or alternatively, simply within The Pickle Factory venue. 

Exploring this area as a concept will develop interesting avenues for fan engagement and future-proof the idea to be built upon for further activations. What starts as a playlist concept could lead to an invite-only bus journey for fans to exclusively preview Nate’s debut album.

---

### The Pickle Factory

As Nate’s first show this is a significant milestone and opportunity to leave a lasting impact upon fans. These are occasions where an artist can have the most direct and personal influence on their fans, inspiring the remarkability in fans to share their experiences with friends, word of mouth still arguably the strongest form of new fan acquisition. 

**Fan Journey**

A fan’s experience of a show doesn’t need to start when they enter the venue, from the moment they have bought their ticket we should be exploring ways to engagement fans in advance. This will lead to greater anticipation of the show and a more immersive experience. Fan data will be dependent upon DICE’s ability to facilitate messaging or an alternative is a CTA for fans to message their ticket email confirmation to create a segmented mailing list in which to deliver messages. This content could range from a personal note from Nate through to snippets of rehearsals and stage production development. 

**Merch**

Expanded on later in the proposal, limited merch served initially exclusive to the show. The inside label could be dated specifically for this show, allowing for an ongoing series to be distributed at upcoming shows and creating a collection encouraging future purchases. 

‘**Evening Shift’ After Party – The Queen Adelaide**

This might feel premature depending on the speed in which Nate sells out his first headline show, not to mentioned it being a Tuesday evening. However, two-minutes walk around the corner on Hackney Road is [The Queen Adelaide](https://www.thequeenadelaide.com/) pub, a great setting for an after-party with a casual street-level bar and extensive basement perfectly suited to a curated after-party. This could be a recurring event post-shows, branded by Nate, which could also act as their own standalone events in the future. Taking influence from Nate himself, branding it as Evening Shift for example, ties it back to Nate along and suitably on this night time aesthetic. Taking it step further you could name them as Episode 001 and onwards, again taking the name from his song title.

---

### Social Media

In a time of constantly fighting to cut through the noise and the unpredictability of changing algorithms on social media, we believe strongly in consolidating fans into a place where the artist can own the conversation and ensure messages are reaching fans with urgency.

**Existing Fans & Close Friends**

Nate’s socials are his shop window and the beginning of the funnel in which to onboard new fans and converting them into core fans. Taking Nate’s 100 Top Friends concept on Instagram, this should continually develop with a significant focus placed on super-serving these fans with advance previews of songs, videos, clips of demos and announcements. 

**Laylo**

As outlined above with Nate’s Top 100 Friends on Instagram, the communication here can lean towards being broadcast orientated with personal connection limited to fans who actively DM Nate or if Nate was to personally DM each fan. Laylo’s Instagram integration allows for a more streamlined way to communicate with these top fan groups along with an automated function of on-boarding fans into these segments rather than manually. 

**co:brand**

As above with Laylo, co:brand are working on similar tools which to allow more direct communication with fans. We have advanced access and they have agreed to integrate with Nate’s TikTok and Instagram to analyse his audience, determine the most engaged and consistent fans (by way of likes, comments and DMs) and allow us to segment those for automated direct messaging.

**Social Media Management**

Nate would benefit from a social media manager, delivering a weekly schedule in which to maintain a frequent posting. They would also contribute to new areas of growth and content ideas to increase and maintain fan engagement. If this couldn’t be executed in-house we’d suggest considering [CYOA](https://cyoamedia.com/), a diverse roster and experienced company.

---

### **Live on The Evening Shift**

Nate’s vocal and performance as reflected in the Putting On Airs’ video leaves an unmistakable and lasting impression upon the viewer. We propose placing more emphasis on performance lead content with Nate playing the piano and singing. These would be self-recorded sessions of original material and covers, 1-2 camera setup and kept to a simple format to emphasise the beauty of Nate’s performance. A one-day shoot could yield 4-5 songs and be rolled out across consecutive weeks – the publish time could be based on the fan’s location globally, meaning it can only be viewed from 10:00pm on the published date to maintain the night time aesthetic. 

Performance Examples: 

Sampha – [(No One Knows Me) Like The Piano](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_NSuIYwBxu4)

slowthai – [ADHD](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MAYNdjIqcFA)

King Krule – [Live on The Moon](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4tbXisC4Gw0)

C.E. – [Mudra](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iMRWSAiOB5w)

Dijon – [Big Mike’s](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XaRVVtoRnuY) (Live on The Tonight Show)

---

### Don’t Fade

**Red Pill _ Blue Pill**

The choose your own adventure approach based on the popular Matrix concept gives fan’s agency. A website where fans make the choice in which to be rewarded with advance previews of the song, a discount code to merch, an advance screening of session content and more. Fundamentally this is about exploring ways to engage fans pre-release and provide an opportunity for data capture.

**Maverick Sabre**

Explore ways to engage with Maverick Sabre and tap into his fanbase, whether that’s collaborative posts on Instagram or utilising Spotify’s Blend playlist function to offer fans insight into their joint inspirations behind the track.

**Forever Save**

As previously mentioned, a push to a one-time action to ensure this and future releases will be saved to fan’s Spotify libraries, This can be executed via Laylo and Symphony OS. Not all DSPs can make use of this action however and the usual recurring pre-save will need to be actioned. 

**Performance**

Based on the proposed Live on The Evening Shift idea, Don’t Fade could be the first track in the series, previewed live to announce the single in exchange for the single being pre-saved. Nate could perform solo and then perhaps featuring Maverick Sabre as an addition episode at a later date.

---

### **Top Line Positioning**

This isn’t meant to be an exhaustive or deep dive of researched affinity. Rather it’s a sweeping association of what comes to mind when we think of Nate; his sound, aesthetic, and positioning.

**Artists**

[James Blake](https://open.spotify.com/artist/53KwLdlmrlCelAZMaLVZqU?si=2QGdIiP2QIifSu6LOVKqYg)

[Burial](https://open.spotify.com/artist/0uCCBpmg6MrPb1KY2msceF?si=G8igkEwUSa2EYUWD-yLnYQ)

[Jim Legxacy](https://open.spotify.com/artist/7IrBqZo6diq3hV3GpUhrs2?si=4V7_kVLoSpqx4dVu8H-o_w)

[Steve Lacy](https://open.spotify.com/artist/57vWImR43h4CaDao012Ofp?si=08vkbhMQTKSLsRy9J4mCnw)

[Elmiene](https://open.spotify.com/artist/2CLclpIC43fLzsYq6LQvlL?si=WE9VOrsjRr29MCz2c-uUIg)

[Duval Timothy](https://open.spotify.com/artist/4t5XnkAKxcaYcDXI726A4Y?si=Iy8A9Xe5Sq6qvzlLPb1AoQ) 

[Mansur Brown](https://open.spotify.com/artist/1ky3oGuE5XOsOzqiFEGwqR?si=OV17LH_HSZuDFe27CPJ6VA)

[TYSON](https://open.spotify.com/artist/10SYd6NatYImOQTxA88jdn?si=LMILnaYERX2kmZzY8b001Q)

[Yusef Dayes](https://open.spotify.com/artist/2rspptKP0lPBdlJJAJHqht?si=wTNrSUjqR9WeCFDTWwUR5Q)

[Joy O](https://open.spotify.com/artist/0aIpJqqTLf683ojWREc5lg?si=2WfXr3p6RK-hw5YITBERWA)

[Cleo Sol](https://open.spotify.com/artist/3ETLPQkcEd7z4k3IbZmXMq?si=StPTiOGGS02oZsGhB-JKQw)

[Infinite Coles](https://open.spotify.com/artist/1OUKcUMWgpiUgctbvFS5PZ?si=8buEck53Qyu1yWqDLSREDw)

[Charlotte Day Wilson](https://open.spotify.com/artist/3GQboECxDT1xqPPWC30p7v?si=yMrchLupTM6t6mKgI9IoCQ)

[Moses Sumney](https://open.spotify.com/artist/5W10uJRsbt9bROJDKoI1Wn?si=ivBCE675TZC2ARTRxc858g)

[Yves Tumor](https://open.spotify.com/artist/0qu422H5MOoQxGjd4IzHbS?si=P8Z_qvk9QtqMfntBouGwzA)

[Dijon](https://open.spotify.com/artist/0knGpCTbmG4ctl1wzYRZs4?si=hqUQYqfETmGTZxFDlAR7iw)

[Sampha](https://open.spotify.com/artist/2WoVwexZuODvclzULjPQtm?si=f5301ThbTyagjITiXJMhDQ)

[Dominic Fike](https://open.spotify.com/artist/6USv9qhCn6zfxlBQIYJ9qs?si=T7K0sg35Qkiiu21WdJG6VA)

**Brands**

[Corteiz](https://www.crtz.xyz/)

[Nike](https://www.nike.com/)

[Stussy](https://www.stussy.com/)

[Polaroid](https://www.polaroid.com/)

[Depop](https://www.depop.com/)

[Goodhood](https://goodhoodstore.com/)

[END.](https://www.endclothing.com/gb)

[Aries](https://www.ariesarise.com/)

[Always Do What You Should Do](https://uk.alwaysdowhatyoushoulddo.com/)

[Alltimers](https://alltimers.com/)

[MAPLE](https://www.mapleco.ca/)

[WTAPS](https://www.wtaps.com/)

[Brain Dead](https://wearebraindead.com/)

[HOKA](https://www.hoka.com/)

[Converse](https://www.converse.com/uk)

**Mixed Media**

Benji B 

Mary-Anne Hobbs

Genius

NTS

Kindred Radio

Foundation.FM

The Lot Radio

Euphoria

13 Reasons Why

Heartstopper

Tape Notes

---

### Creatives

A list of suggested directors and photographers for consideration.

[Tyrus](https://www.instagram.com/tyru.s/)

[Joe Howat](https://www.instagram.com/joe.howat/)

[ofkand](https://www.instagram.com/ofkand)

[Jay Russel](https://www.instagram.com/jayrussellstudio/)

[Alistair McVeigh](https://www.instagram.com/135alistair/)

[ABOVEGROUND](https://www.instagram.com/aboveground/)

[fidel](https://www.instagram.com/beingfidel/)

[Azar Strato](https://www.instagram.com/azarstrato)

[ZL](https://www.instagram.com/zlewiz)