# Everything I Need I Get From You

Author: Kaitlyn Tiffany
Publication Date: 2022
Year Read: 2024

They (fans) were driven by passion, but also by a desire for control. Because of their role in promoting and financially supporting the artists they love, these fans have maintained a creator's hand throughout those artists' careers, treating them as collaborative projects. They take responsibility for every setback and share in the thrill of every success. P23

One Direction arrived at the same time as commercial social media, and they rose at the same time as a new wave of anxiety, isolation, and fractured attention. Their success in that contest doesn't strike me as a coincidence, but the mystery of how so many people were able to find happiness through watching them and talking about them deserves documentation. P24

As one-dimensional "girl power" rhetoric and corporate feminism have once again succeeded in leeching real meaning from the women's movement, pop stars have also appropriated for their own use, to charm greater allegiance from fans by embracing an extremely narrow idea of what i means to support women: supporting the beautiful women they've turned into stars, defending them on the internet by lashing out against anybody who would ostracise them. P25

Every generation's boy band serves a slightly different purpose, but if there is one unifying characteristic I can see, it's that a boy band opens up space. Infatuation is irrational but it can be a precursor to introspection. The experience of bodily joy is an invitation to reconsider the conditions that hold you away from it most of the time. Screaming at pop music is not direct action, and screaming does not make a person a revolutionary, or even resistant, but what screaming can and does do is punctuate prolonged periods of silence. p38

To see or hear me and my sisters at the One Direction concert that night, early August, you would say we were hysterical. We were screaming. I can't speak for everyone in the crowd—-the Rogers Centre holds more than fifty-three thousand—but for me, it wasn't the sight of five famous boys that made me feel like something uncommon was happening. It wasn't the sound of their voices, which I couldn't even hear. It was the fifty-thousand-person shouting match disguised as a sing-along, and the thunderclap of sneakers hitting concrete on every downbeat, eliminating the need to speak or catch any individual eye. Outside, the strange things we were capable of feeling were sneered at of smiled off or commercially packaged as "girl power." but here they were rough and loud. The sounds were ugly. Our hairlines were damp and the tendons in the backs of our knees were screaming. One pair of hands looked just like every other, outstretched in the dark, lining the bottom of other people's camera frames. We knew that our lives would not be fantasies, except for the fact that they were right now. When we shrieked, it was at the knowledge that the moment would end. P48

early adopters innovated the idea that the internet might be organized by affinity. Though early internet fandom was invite-only and near exclusive to well-paid white men, it was also the first evidence of a pattern. Fans became, almost as a rule, the first to adopt new platforms and to invent new features of the internet—a habit molded by the fact that they were the people with the most obvious incentive to do so. P73

They referred to themselves as hackers, and they acted as if they were above the laws not just of their respective countries but of reality itself. They bragged not only about leaking albums and breaking Twitter, but about things they could not possibly have actually done, like acquiring the ultrasounds of each band member in utero. as well as scans of their passports. They made One Direction into the biggest band in the world not simply by loving them, but by sowing chaos on every online platform they touched. Almost everything they did was worthy of media attention because almost everything they did had never been seen before and literally could not be explained. In 2019, one tan account "leaked" the penis sizes of every member of the band, insisting that Liam Payne's was more than ten inches long. For a year, another fan tweeted in character as "Liam's 10 inch," providing the Twitter bio "I AM THE OFFICIAL 10 INCH OF LIAM PAYNE." On Twitter, anyone who doesn't remember all of that is a "local." This is one of the more casually devastating labels one can acquire in the digital age. A local is a person who belongs to no subculture, understands no intricacies of online humor, follows only the accounts of people they know in real life— and maybe The Nee York Times?- and retweets only the best generic content. P95

If you haven’t been around since the early days of One Direction but buy a ticket to a Harry
Styles concert just because you like his pants, you’re a
local, taking up space that doesn't belong to you. If
you'e confused by fan-made supercuts of Korean pop stars, proliferating in the replies to any viral tweet on any subject, you are a local. Locals have no identity, no
allegiances, no personality, no charisma, no passions,
no curiosity, and no reason to be on the internet at all.
A local joins Twitter to share professional news, which they refer to as "personal news," and to retweet "in-spiring" human interest stories. They love "relatable" content and memes that are long past relevant, and they're also, it's implied, kind of lazy. A local is a person who has not been bothered. They haven't felt moved to do the work of stanning. Maybe it's more useful to say what a local is not: A local is the opposite of the One Direction fan who started a new Twitter account in 2010—while the band was still just a contender on The X Factor—in order to share "facts" like
"the boys blood types" (Liam: AB. Louis: O. Niall: A.
Harry and Zayn: B.) and each of their heights, in inches and in centimetres (all are under six feet, and Niall is the shortest, at five foot seven, or 171 centimetres). A local would never hang around, waiting for Niall to say that he can't calculate his rising sign because he doesn't remember what time he was born, ready to supply the answer (8:04 a.m.). P96

"Stan Twitter, a broad term encompassing all of the superfans of anything under the sun. (The word "stan" is taken from an Eminem song about an obsessive fan, but is sometimes also referred to as a portmanteau of "stalker" and "fan.") Looking at Twitter through the eyes of a local, you can certainly see that stans are there. You can sense their gravitational pull and the way they drag every conversation into their realm of relevance, making every day online about them and their wishes and their feelings on the many injustices of the Billboard charts. Locals roll their eyes at the antics of Stan Twitter, which seems always to be in hysterics and on the edge of a meltdown, as well as bent on dragging everyone else down with them. But they can't do anything about it. P97

Stan Twitter was molded by these three influences: the emotional valence of Weird Twitter, simultaneously detached and totally out of control; the public-private flattening of Celebrity Twitter, which promised that from now on we would always have access to a behind-the-scenes candor from anyone and everyone; and the tight networking and enthusiastic riffing of Black Twitter, which took the shapelessness of the site and gave it a conversational form. The type of densely connected networks that Manjoo noted-in which people with shared cultural reference points follow each other's accounts, becoming what's known now as
*mutuals-is crucial to fandom, which sustains itself by rapidly escalating the visibility of its passions and funnelling attention to the celebrities and causes it cares about. The idea that hashtags could be used to elaborate on jokes or to sustain conversation on niche or insider-y topics preceded the rise of fan practices such as streaming parties and stan wars. P101/102

Critics of social media often point out that Twitter's functionality and engagement-juicing business model rewards dramatics and over-the-top rhetoric— suggesting that the platform is its cause. But it's also the emotional stakes of Stan Twitter that set the tone. Scrolling through my timeline at any given moment, theatrics are being pushed to ever more elaborate heights. "If taylor swift murders me DO NOT PROSECUTE HER !!!" one fan writes.? Another shares a photo of Harry Styles, captioning it "he's so sexy break my back like a glow stick daddy." The structure of stan networks is what makes them feel so unavoidable on Twitter-their slang is everywhere, their trends are filling up the sidebar, their wrath is coming down on anyone who makes so much as an offhanded comment about a pop singer whose latest single was not their best. P109

Yet any kind of harassment at scale relies on some of the same mechanisms—a tightly connected group identifying an enemy and agreeing on an amplification strategy, providing social rewards to members of the group who display the most dedication or creativity, backchannel-ing to maintain the cohesion of the in-group, which is always outsmarting and out-cooling its hapless victims, all while maintaining a conviction of moral superiority. Twitter provides a platform for some of the worst habits of fandom. P116

When I'm doom-scrolling through a timeline full of terrible news and inane bickering, it's a treat to come across all-caps excitement or an ultra-niche joke. Or to wake up and find that there is a conversation going on and that I understand it, and that people are excited about something and I am too. This is the type of thing that can buoy a person for an hour or so at a time. In the same way that holidays give shape to formless years, album promotion and single releases give color to the days that line up one after another. There is a reason to stay up late. There is a reason to wake up early. There is something to do at lunch when you feel like you'd like to cry and take a nap. There are people who swear they hacked into an airport security camera, and aren't you interested to see what they saw, even if you find that totally weird and ultimately quite scary? I like Stan Twitter because it is so peculiar, even as millions of people participate in it and it should have become generic. P117

These basically content-less stories are timeless, even though the mechanisms are modern-the experience of becoming a fan has never been easy to describe. Though social media popularized the idea of stan as an identity cate-gory, as well as the word "stan" itself, it hasn't clarified how a person transforms from "regular" to "stan." The commercial apparatus of the internet is interested only in whether I love One Direction, and not how or why I came to, a question around which there still is— and now I'm not only speaking for myself-plenty of mystery. P125

Today, it is even less clear what "fan" really means. The people in charge of entertainment proper - ties or consumer brands consider anybody who pays money for the thing they produce a fan. In everyday speech, we say someone is a "fan" of anything they like, no matter to what degree. Coca-Cola refers to people who buy Coca-Cola as fans of Coca-Cola. During an average bit of small talk, I might refer to myself as a fan of shallots or not a fan of bell peppers.
The word "fan" is now synonymous with consumer loyalty; you could be forgiven for considering it a marketing word. Words like "stan" and, especially, words like "trash"-which started in early web fandom, faded out, and were revived on Tumblr in the mid-2010s, just as the commercialization of fans was reaching a new peak—are aggressively useless for marketing purposes, giving them their charm.!* They signal derangement and depravity and they welcome confusion and disgust. To be One Direction trash is to be the type of fan who is devoted beyond the stereotype of asking Mom to buy a lunch box with Zayn Malik's face on it, or to put up the extra cash for VIP tickets at some arena sponsored by a car company. P129

That being a fan interferes with a person's ability to be financially responsible or perform some of the more mundane tasks of adult life is part of what makes it fun, but it's also a source of conflict.
Women who indulge in frivolities like One Direction concert tickets are often seen as spoiled teenagers (wasting their parents' money), or irresponsible adults (refusing to put that cash in a savings account), or inappropriately self-interested parents (who should be spending everything on their children). And the financial imperative of fandom is not just a personal strain; it also leaves the impassioned open to exploita-tion. It turns a core piece of a person's identity into something that can be bought and sold. Calling yourself "trash" is a way of accepting all of these external characterisations, as well as pointing out they don’t matter. P130/131

that everyone lives with," says Henry Jenkins, a media scholar at the University of Southern California who is known as the father of fandom studies because of his 1992 book Textual Poachers: Television Fans & Participatory Culture. "At one level, fans are ideal consumers," he told me. "They're deeply invested in the performer and they'll buy all kinds of merchandise related to that performer. But fans reject the basic relationship that is set up by the industry. They're always trying to push beyond the basic exchange of money. The entertainment industry is a tool or mechanism for fandom, but it's not what fandom is." 3 Fans intuitively understand the difference between the official product and their highly personal use of it. They might call themselves One Direction trash to accentuate this distinction outwardly, but individually it's very obvious. Personally, the moments when I've spent money on One Direction do not stand out as important ones-the first One Direction T-shirt I bought at Heinz Field was very ugly, I felt. I've since lost it. Who cares? P131

all combinations of identity are equally unlikely, and we can only be experts in our own. Some of the stigma of fandom comes not from cruelty or genuine disdain but from that simple fact-almost everyone is too complicated to be quickly understood. P135

"The importance of fandom for personal identity is not so much about the disorder caused by the mass media as it is about the order found in devotion."? P136

on the cover of Janice Radway's 1984 book about women fans of romance novels, Reading the Romance: Women, Patriarchy, and Popular Literature, a woman with big hair and a red sweater sits curled up alone on a floral couch in front of matching floral drapes, with a pile of children's toys visible behind her shoulder.
She's reading a novel, which has an illustration on the cover of a man kissing a woman's neck, but she's doing so covertly, alone in the middle of the day. Radway's book was about secrecy, but she was also one of the first scholars to suggest that fandom could be studied without pulling it out of the context of daily domestic life. Daily domestic life was, in fact, what motivated some kinds of fandom, she discovered. The women Radway interviewed articulated their disappointments with the artistic limits of the novels they loved, but they made the case for enjoying them as an indulgence and as a distraction from the sharper disappointments of the real world. They used the books "to diversify the pace and character of their habitual existence," she wrote.? In previous studies of the plight of the housewife, women reported feeling lonely and isolated, and described their social roles as ones that precluded the pursuit of self-interest or personal pleasure. P137

she found was that women who admired Kate Bush for her feminism and her independence "were not always able to translate this into powerful positions in their own lives." They talked about listening to Bush's music when boyfriends or husbands weren't home or were occupied by something else in another room. "Kate Bush is what I'll put on when I'm alone in the house. And I've got some time," one told her. They talked about resenting the men in their lives for not understanding, but they only rarely mentioned rebelling against the arrangement. "An ex-boyfriend was jealous of how, when I got sad, I wouldn't indulge in it with him, I would go and drink or listen to Kate and dance around my room until it's completely gone," one woman said. "I'd be sort of singing out of tune at the top of my voice, like [the song 'Cloud-busting' or whatever, and then walk back in the room and I'd feel great and I could see that he was like numb.” P139

When Harry Styles fans employed these tactics to juice the numbers for his first solo single, "Sign of the Times," in 2017, 1 asked a fan named Tessa why she was doing it. "I got involved because I love the DIY attitude," she told me.  "It's taking things in your own hands as a fandom." It was even, she ventured, a bit "
"punk." P154/155

There's no reason to interrogate whether One Direction is actually punk, but it is fun to point out a couple of similarities, including the fact that neither were merely widely observed phenomena-they were scenes. The scene in One Direction's case was online rather than downtown or in basements, but it had its own language and culture and signifiers of belonging.
There were other tactical and creative similarities between this pop music fandom and the musical under-grounds that came before. The wealth of music zines in the 1990s, for example, came from geographically dis-persed, passionate, lonely outsiders who both gushed over and critiqued their idols on handwritten pages.
They were not for profit (in fact they lost money), they were collaborative (participatory, transformative), and they were decidedly amateur. They weren't always political, but they were serious about wasting time.
They labored unproductively or counterproductively on something that most people considered emphatically dumb. P155

One Direction's final album, and the system officially debuted with the release of "Perfect" that October.
There was one form for signing up to give a gift and another form for signing up to receive one, each feeding into separate pages of a spreadsheet. The simple code that she wrote would group the data by country and then, as she explained it to me, "walk down each side looking for an open spot. The first open gifter spot gets paired with the first open receiver spot and the match is noted on each side. Once it gets to the end of the file and has gathered all the new matches, it gets the gifters and sends an email with the emails of the people they should gift to." There was no money being exchanged, so she was never nervous about the system being scammed. But it could send out seventy-five emails per minute, so she did sometimes get nervous about blasting out typos or other errors. The system has been used a few dozen times; new projects can be "generated with the push of a button, and then running matches is a push of a button, so over the years it's been low maintenance." P162

The identity of the fandom was reliant on continuing to do this. In the same way that fans transform One Direction's image with fanfiction and fan art, they transform their own image by playing with expectations and flouting the rules. Media presentations of punk music scenes or underground art movements or, in this case, a legion of so-called screaming fangirls give these groups a sense of collective identity, even and especially if the groups disagree with the way they're depicted. This is true for all kinds of subcultures. "De-rogatory media coverage is not the verdict but the essence of their resistance," the sociologist Sarah Thornton wrote in her 1995 book Club Cultures, a history of dance clubs and raves.2 As much as Project No Control was about promoting a One Direction song out of love for One Direction, it was also about refuting the media's portrayal of what One Direction was, and who the people who loved them were. The song was adult, lovingly and sarcastically referred to by its promoters as a "boner song." (Part of the chorus is "Waking up / Beside you I'm a loaded gun!") The call to action wasn't just to bring attention to one song; it was to bring attention to the fact that the band members were adults and serious musicians, and that the fans were adults now, too. P165

Activism in a fandom context has often been concerned with visibility. The causes tend to be identity based, and the aim is often to win from the stars in question some explicit recognition that these identities exist within their audience, that they are impor-tant, and that both star and fan are aligned with a broader political movement related to this identity.
But the choices that Styles fans made during the protests of 2020 reveal a shift or logical progression in this thinking. Fandom activism has been mostly visibility based so far, but it could still be a precursor to something bigger: visibility is a starting point for ac-tivism, and not its end goal. "Pop culture doesn't really change the world," the labor organizer Teo Bugbee wrote for SSENSE that summer. "It's a product to be consumed, an indulgence. But the gift of pop is that it actualizes a fantasy: visions of a world that doesn't yet and maybe won't ever exist."? Harry Styles fans didn't imagine that they would erase the structural problems of the societies they lived in by calling attention to themselves, or that being seen by people who like the same music as they did was overtly political. P241

To hope that Niall Horan deeply cares about my rights is to hope that the other men I love do. To expect that Liam Payne understands why there are so many rainbow flags in the crowd is to believe that anyone should. To want Harry Styles to wave a Black Lives Matter flag onstage is to believe that the world is shifting, and to ask him to do it is to insist on it. We don't need to be told that these men are more a reflection of us than we are of them. P243

We love to fan so much, we'll take nobodies and make them into stars, just because they filmed themselves skate-boarding, drinking cranberry juice, and listening to Fleetwood Mac, or simply because they yodeled for a few minutes in a Walmart. We trot out a new icon every week, adulating them until they do something worthy of a fall, or until we forget. We stan everything now, from Supreme Court justices to new flavors of sparkling water. I have recently stanned a local news blog, a stranger in the comments of a YouTube video, my own sister, a friend's puppy, and a bottle of skin-contact wine. P246

Fandom is the dominant mode of commerce-the backbone of the influencer economy, the force behind the bizarre rise of self-aware Brand Twitter and the dizzying ascent of a handful of pop stars whose personal fortunes are larger than the yearly budgets for some small cities. Brand loyalty has been rebranded as fan-dom, as has passive consumption of all sorts of media, from HGTV to Spotify playlists. The word "audience" slips seamlessly between concert halls and follower counts. The word "love" drifts around like a leaf. P247

The little indignities of being young and the big disappointments of not finding the love you want or of not becoming the person you'd hoped-these things are tempered by fandom, which is such an ugly, boring word. Fandom is an interruption; it's as simple as enjoying something for no reason, and it's as complicated as growing up. It should be celebrated for what it can provide in individual lives, but it should also be taken seriously for what it can do at scale-not because I like it or because being a girl is cool now, but because fans are connecting based on affinity and instinct and participating in hyperconnected networks that they built for one purpose but can use for many others. We need to know what fandom can do and what it can't, and we need to figure out who might try to manipulate it and why. Everything we need is right in front of us. We should talk about how we went on-line, driven by some sort of longing, and why we stayed there, pushing that want outward, over and over, until it couldn't be ignored. P269

[](Everything%20I%20Need%20I%20Get%20From%20You%20275d3798725d80c4855ee86933c5728b/Untitled%20275d3798725d805883b9d3884a8ca984.md)