# Fanocracy

Author: David Meerman Scott, Reiki Scott
Publication Date: 2020
Year Read: 2025

Being a fan builds close connections to others with whom we share interests. The behaviour and its results can be a model for others to mirror. P9

We can be conditioned to view some people as stereotypes of fandom, such as the socially awkward characters depicted on television shows like The Big Bang Theory or Revenge of the Nerds. Many assume fandom is only for those holed up in their basements or starry-eyed teenage girls or the otaku. Are these extremes the only ways to be a fan? Is it true that those who commit their time and effort to what others might consider frivolous hobbies are living less meaningful lives than people who single-mindedly pursue their education and careers?
We have come to the conclusion that too many people limit their own enjoyment of the things they love. Do they worry that pouring their hearts into the activities they enjoy might affect how others see them? Are they afraid of being reduced to a mere stereotype? We all have interests that engage us, and we use these to reach out to others, whether it be a short "Did you watch the game last night?" during your lunch break or an invitation to watch the new Marvel movie release in theaters next weekend. Interests connect us. Fandoms connect us. That's the kind of human connection we crave. P16/17

The algorithms deployed by social networks like Facebook don't show us what we want to see, because the technology favors profit for shareholders rather than the original promise of allowing people to interact with their friends, families, and colleagues. We get tidal waves of spam email and social networks that display advertisements instead of messages from our friends, and fake news instead of what we, as humans, really need to know to lead fulfilling and productive lives.
Worse, scammers have figured out how to game the networks to lure people into partisan content loops to prey on our worst fears and create new ones. While most people understand that a free social network means some loss of privacy, we didn't sign up to have our innermost thoughts, secrets, and notes to ourselves and loved ones stolen and sold to the highest bidder.
The result is a polarizing and cold digital world. Many people now feel that the promise of online social connection just isn't for them anymore-the romance is over. Many people have told us that they have canceled their online presence and opted for privacy they can control themselves. The pendulum has swung too far in the direction of superficial online communications at a time when people are hungry for true human connection. P18

We see the same shift playing out in the world of human communications. We've gone too far into manufactured friendship through social media, and something different is coming next. The pendulum is swinging back to genuine, authentic human connections. P18

In a digital world where our lives are increasingly cluttered and superficial, we're missing something tremendously powerful: genuine human connection. People are going to be most invested in that which creates a sense of intimacy, warmth, and shared meaning in a world that would otherwise relegate them to a statistic. P20

We call this act of consciously bringing people together through a shared endeavor a fanocracy: an organization or person that honors fans and consciously fosters meaningful connections among them. The suffix "-cracy," from the Greek kratos for "rule," is used in popular culture as well as in academia to mean government by a particular sort of people or according to a particular principle. A fanocracy is a culture where fans rule, and that's what we see emerging in today's world. We are moving into an era that prizes people over products. P21

The fundamental ingredient for true fandom-meaningful and active human connection-demonstrates a shift in the way a company relates to its customers. It is more forthright, helpful, and transparent. It creates new experiences by turning customers into like-minded, enthusiastic fans. P21

To be successful in a world where fans rule, we must be convinced that relationships with customers are more important than the products or services we sell to them. Meaningful human connection, the fundamental ingredient for true fandom, can be created by all kinds of different companies, even those who never meet customers in person or speak with them on the telephone. P30

It's up to us to create what we do around whether it brings people together. To succeed, we must become masters of seeing things from other people's points of view and understanding how other people work independently from ourselves. It's a simple yet powerful concept that any organization can implement. The idea of building relationships is an especially valuable ingredient for traditional businesses facing growing competition from the rise of digital products and services. Many analysts and members of the media like to point to online shopping leading to the demise of locally owned stores, and the availability of digital music creating major difficulties for those in the music business, including radio stations and record labels. Yes, digital music platforms are tough to compete against. However, as you can see by now, there are major opportunities to thrive instead of succumbing to what many say is an inevitable digital future. P34/35

Open House Party: The Radio Show That Beats the Playlist
Some traditional industries face competition from new digital products and services so severe that entire businesses are being wiped out. For example, we can purchase air travel, hotel stays, and car rentals with a few clicks, so what does that mean for travel agents? When a quick search shows the exact price of a car, how does a car dealer skilled at haggling cope? With new ways to consume music, movies, and books, how can existing providers adapt so they don't become extinct? John Garabedian, the creator and host for thirty years of Open House Party, a live show syndicated on hundreds of radio stations as well as available via web streaming around the world, told us, "With music streaming services like Pandora, Spotify, and Apple Beats to compete with, radio needs to offer something more than just songs to be sticky' to compete and attract and hold a huge audience." Virtually every major star in the world has been on Open House Party over the years, including Madonna, Eminem, Lady Gaga, and Katy Perry. The essence of the show is a big Saturday night party with music stars joining a small live audience in the studio and listeners calling in live to be a part of the action. Tuning in, listeners hear from the artists, experience the excitement of the audience, and learn about what's hot from the listener requests coming in live on the phone and the web. For many music fans, the excitement of Open House Party is much more fun than simply listening to a playlist on a streaming service because of the interaction with other like-minded people. The direction of each show is totally driven by fans because all the music played on Open House Party is by listener request. This keeps the show tuned in to what people actually want to hear on Saturday nights. This direct connection with fans means Open House Party spots hot new hits first, identifies which songs are the most popular, and, almost as important, determines which songs have died and people have grown tired of hearing. "Unlike music streaming services that just play tunes, radio needs to sound compelling and fun so that people don't just 'listen' to a show or a station, they actually love a show or a station," Garabedian says. "Great radio gives listeners reasons to be loyal. Outstanding stations attract fans, not just listeners." Garabedian built a fanocracy of millions of music lovers coming together, listening to Open House Party on hundreds of radio stations on Saturday nights. Sure, they may listen to their own playlists on the digital streaming services during the week, but when they want to party on Saturday nights, they tune in. Rather than give up in the face of stiff competition from online services, people like Garabedian devise ways to build relationships directly with fans. The human connection brings loyalty. For the music fans devoted to Open House Party, music is much more than just the product (the songs). Music is engaging with others like themselves to enjoy the lifestyle that music and conversation about music bring. By finding ways to gather people together in live, shared consumption of a product, companies can connect with their fans in ways that digital solutions cannot. P35/36/37

While many companies falsely think that their job is to facilitate a transaction and to do so at as low of a cost as possible, your job is to create fandom. Your transition from transaction to fandom is especially powerful when you are dealing with stiff competition that offers products similar to yours. When others are simply selling products, you succeed by creating lasting relationships with those who will become lifelong fans. It requires a genuine interest in your customers, anticipating their needs and wants. P42

At that performance, the crowd went wild, the show was named as a standout by Rolling Stone, and many people shared on social media because of a simple but frequently overlooked dynamic in our digital age: physical proximity. Suddenly I realized this was a factor I needed to examine more closely. It occurred to me that fandom is a result of doing what you love, and if you bring forth that passion and share with others, it's possible to create an organizational phenomenon: fanocracy. Bringing that concept into my talks has been overwhelmingly favorable. People want to share their experiences, and what better place to begin than at work? That's the first place people share where they went over the holiday, on the weekend, or the night before. It's that sharing that creates a common bond, and in some cases, you can introduce someone else to a band, play, opera, or game they might never have been curious about but for your shared enthusiasm. P49

If we want to be effective in our communications, we need to learn how to consciously manage the physical space between ourselves and others. It's not just a matter of being close or far, or that the closer we get the better it is. Rather, the significance of each level of proximity can be precisely predicted and managed so as to create the most optimal outcomes. Hall described "public distance" as more than twelve feet away from others, a distance that lacks any sense of precise interaction among those involved. He identified "social distance" for interactions among acquaintances as being from four feet to twelve feet, "personal distance" for interactions among good friends or family from about a foot and a half to four feet, and anything closer as "intimate distance" for embracing, touching, or whispering. The most rewarding interactions in our lives occur in our social and personal spaces. Those people sitting near one another at a game or at Starbucks or who are standing near one another in a line at a movie theater or live music show? They're well within each other's social space, and as such each person can unconsciously feel the human connection in a positive and safe way. P50/51

"The work of Dr. Hall is incredibly important because one of the things we're just coming to learn now, thanks to neuroscience, is whenever human beings get together in any kind of situation in the same physical space, their unconscious minds track the locale of every other person in that space even if they can't see them," Dr. Nick Morgan told us. Morgan is president of Public Words, a communications consulting company, and the author of Power Cues: The Subtle Science of Leading Groups, Persuading Others, and Maximizing Your Personal Impact.
Morgan's work on how humans interact parallels how fandom cultures form and grow-and how important these bonds are to each of us. "We’re a species that wants to get together in groups of friends, of people that we feel safe with, a tribe, and we want to share our emotions," Morgan says. "We're happiest when we’re in social space or personal space with people and we’re all experiencing some kind of emotion. We're laughing together or we're crying together. It's why-even in an era when you can watch a football game much more intelligently and closely and clearly and certainly more comfortably on a giant TV screen like many of us have in our homes-people still go to the football stadium. They want to experience the thrill of the shared emotion and excitement. The closer you get within those four zones— for example, from public to social and from social to personal-the more powerful the shared emotions are. That kind of group sharing of emotion is incredibly important to humans and it's been widely misunderstood and underrated by people who have subscribed to individualistic notions of humanity."
People don't want to be alone; they want to be together. Take note of what Morgan teaches us. The closer you get, the more powerful the shared emotions are. The significance of proximity isn't just a matter of convenience or utility, but rather the emotional significance of any given exchange. We're wired as humans to have more emotionally significant responses to people we're close to. And whether we're twelve feet, four feet, or even one and a half feet apart leads to decidedly different emotions. A fan is who they are not because of a calculated, intellectual decision to follow something, but because of their passion, their emotion, and their sense of enjoyment. To successfully build a fan base out of whatever it is you're doing for a living, or if you want to sell or market a product or service, begin to think of creative ways to develop and cultivate human connections. Remember the importance of proximity because that can lead you to a better understanding of how to attract and keep potential fans interested in your products or services. P52/53

A music festival becomes an instant city filled with like-minded people enjoying the same music and being near one another. While waiting for a show to start, we spontaneously form a community, striking up conversations with those around us, secure in the knowledge that we have instant rapport because we share the same interest, and the conversation is smooth and natural, as if we've been friends for a long time. Someone asks, "Have you seen St. Vincent before? What was it like?" Another may join in: "Have there been any other standout performances today? Who are you going to see tomorrow?" It's not surprising that the live music business is thriving. While CD sales are in decline and revenues from streaming haven't kept up, Live Nation Entertainment, one of the world's largest live entertainment companies, which operates concert promotions, venues, and ticketing, has seen revenue steadily climb for the past decade from $3.6 billion per year in 2007 to over $10 billion in 2017. P54

Normally, when we attend a typical stage performance such as theater, dance, music, or stand-up comedy, we're usually in the "public space" of the performer, a distance of twelve feet or more. At those distances, neuroscientists say, our unconscious brain does not track people to learn if they are friend or foe. We don't have or feel a strong personal connection when we're so far away. While public distance is inclusive of as little as twelve feet, more often with larger stage performances the distance might be one hundred feet or more. In other contexts of daily life such as a walk in a park, there are likely to be many people within our public space, but they might as well be hundreds or thousands of feet away from us, because our unconscious mind doesn't pay close attention to them. The experiences we share with those nearer than twelve feet away, as you can now see, is quite significant. Building fandom-whether you're an artist, CEO, entrepreneur, manager, politician, teacher, parent, spouse, friend, or other role that involves gaining a closer relationship with others—requires figuring out ways to have other people less than twelve feet away, even if only for a few moments. P57

Mirroring and Your Fans
So far in this chapter we've looked at the importance of proximate human connection in growing a fan base. People go to live music for more than the show; they go to enjoy close proximity with other people like them. Steve Cohen built a successful career as a magician by building his show so that every member of the audience has a personal connection directly with him, and those audience members tell their friends about how great the experience was, He's performed over five thousand shows and never needs to advertise. We explored how the entire recreational vehicle industry came together to more than double the market for new RVs in a decade by appealing to people's desire to camp in groups. And we spoke with a teenage egg entrepreneur who meets personally with customers and has become remarkably successful as a result.
Let's face it, we humans are hardwired to react to those who are nearby. Our evolution has taught us to unconsciously track those who come near us in order to quickly determine if they are good or harmful, Because these basic instincts are so powerful, when we are close to many people we don't know, like on a subway platform, for example, we're wary. We can't help that response, it's built into all of us. We’re preparing to flee or to fight if presented with any sign of danger. However, when we are in close proximity to people we trust, a personal connection develops. People who cultivate that closeness, bringing customers within a social distance of fewer than twelve feet or a personal distance of fewer than four feet, create strong emotional bonds, and that can create fans. How can businesses and artists who can't possibly have a direct personal connection with every fan achieve similar success? It turns out that if you perform in front of thousands of people or if your product is used by millions of consumers, you can still use the power of connection. Our unconscious brain can respond to what we see as if it were our own experience, even if it is on social media, film, a screen, or a faraway stage through something called mirror neurons. Mirror neurons are a group of cells in the premotor cortex and inferior parietal cortex of our brain. These neurons are fascinating because they not only activate when we perform an action-biting into an apple, smiling, or getting near to somebody we enjoy being with— they also fire when we observe somebody else performing the same action. When those around us are happy and smiling, our unconscious brain tells us we're happy, and we often smile too. When we're at a rock concert, our mirror neurons fire based on what the performer is doing onstage and what other audience members are doing. I speak at conferences dozens of times a year, often to groups of a thousand people or more. There's no possible way I can bring each person onto the stage to have him or her be within my personal space the way that Steve Cohen does. Yet it turns out that we humans respond to seeing somebody else having an experience as if it were us. I make it a point to come down from the stage into the audience to interact with a few people in their seats several times during each of my talks. I'm purposefully getting into the personal space of just a few members of the audience, but because of their brains' mirror neurons, others in the audience can feel my presence. Dr. Nick Morgan, whom we met earlier, says it's like the ripples of a stone being dropped into a pond. "You can genuinely move, touch, and share emotions with everybody in that audience simply by connecting with one or two people. If you move into the audience and ask a question or get a comment, stand next to a person, shake hands with them, interact with them in some way, then your whole audience feels interacted with and the room suddenly becomes very small and intimate.” P68/69/70

It turns out that mirroring is not just about those directly across from you. An important aspect of mirroring is that the brain fires even when the other person is far away, like during my speeches, or even a virtual presence on a screen. This mirroring helps to explain both the positive and the negative aspects of social media. We can relate to people via images on their Facebook and Instagram posts. Our brain tells us we're close to them because of the photographs or the video they share. Perhaps that's why social networking posts with photos and videos of people tend to have many more social interactions than those with just plain text, and more interaction such as likes and shares than those with photos and videos that don't feature people. There are many mirroring processes going on when it comes to social media and it certainly facilitates an understanding," lacoboni says. "When I see you posting something on a social network, especially on visual networks like Instagram or Facebook, it triggers in my brain all sorts of imaginative processes, so I can understand you from a more human standpoint, not just based on the things you're saying. However, when there is no face-to-face connection on social media, people lose that magical connection and that makes it easier for people to get into an antagonistic way of relating to other people.* As a live music enthusiast, I have been fascinated with how the science of mirroring helps to explain why I am passionate about going to concerts. What lacoboni said reminded me of the time a few years ago when I was dozens of rows away from the stage at a Rolling Stones show, and a simple hand slap that Mick lagger shared with a lucky fan far away from me lit me up too! Apparently, as lacoboni suggests, the mirror neurons in my brain reacted as if lagger had given me a high five. It was an unforgettable part of that show! P71

"An artist can't get close to everybody in the audience," lacoboni says. "But just being close to some audience members builds a sense of oneness between those people who are close and those farther back. Members of the audience fill the gap between the artist and them in terms of distance and space, and when we see a performance, we can imagine the musicians performing the music and empathize with them and mirror neurons are very important for this. To be a more successful artist requires a process that includes both a bottom-up imagination that you mirror your own fans and what they like and then transform that into a top-down plan for transforming your act in a way that will lead your followers." A critical aspect of understanding mirror neurons is to remember that it's how we're hardwired. It's our ancient brain at work helping us to cope with the world around us. It's not something we can choose to turn on or choose to ignore. It's innate. We can't help ourselves to react in the way that we do. P72

The selfie demonstrates something significant to us because of the orientation of our bodies when we snap a photo. While the two (or more) heads are typically well within intimate space, the subjects of the photo are actually facing the same direction. We are in intimate space because we have to get our heads close together. However, because we're oriented in the same direction, we're aligned. This alignment becomes a powerful expression of wanting the same thing as that other person-even if it's only for a fleeting moment.
Some see a selfie as frivolous and childish, but that's outdated thinking. Selfies are a very powerful and immediate way to share emotion. Imagine if two people who didn't trust each other were a foot and a half away. If they were facing each other, they would likely feel awkward or threatened. But when two or more people face the same direction, such as looking at a camera, it's acceptable. The humble selfie breaks the intimate proximity barrier! It is safe and enjoyable. P74

In any type of creation-personal or professional-the greatest insight is gained from seeing it from another person's point of view. P84

What makes this comic so popular? Ukazu seems to have found that perfect point between engaging with her fan base and letting it drive on its own. She's tapped into the sort of story that my generation is yearning for-filled with LGBT characters, people of color, mental illness, fluffy romances, and humor. She also listens to and understands that her work inspires creative energy in others, and so she encourages it.
Ukazu takes a multimedia approach to her creation as well as her interaction with fans. She posts her comic on her website while simultaneously blogging responses to fans and updates on her Tumblr and keeping an in-world Twitter account "run" by Bitty himself over the span of the comic's timeline. Fans can interact with each of these aspects of her world as they please, reblogging or retweeting or commenting on what she has posted. "The stories that developed and the reader interaction added an extra layer of narrative to the webcomic and made people feel like Bitty was real," Ukazu says in an interview with Entertainment Weekly. The heartwarming story set up in this in-leractive fashion made the Check, Please! fandom grow fast. On Archive of Our Own there are more than six thousand works and growing with more art and other fan works on other platforms like Tumblr and Twitter. P87

Ukazu says on Den of Geek that finding her "healthy relationship" with fandom took time to accomplish. "My biggest advice for creators is to leave fandom alone. Appreciate it, but don't try to control it. Simi-larly, readers should understand that headcanons might never be canon and the story and characters belong to the creator. End of story.
The relationship starts to deteriorate when one party tries to control the other." P88

When fans take ownership, it doesn't mean that they take away power from the creators, because it isn't a zero-sum game. Rather, by transforming and adding their layers of understanding, fans are expanding the scope of the original work, propelling it further, reaching far more people than it could have reached before. P91

Curative fandom is what most people are comfortable with. In fact, it is the focus of heavy marketing from in-dustries. It's the accumulated knowledge and physical medium of a work—the trivia, the action figures, the baseball cards, the tell-all autobiographies —that define curative fandom. On the other hand, there are many other car enthusiasts who love the transformative category of car fandom. They build hot rods by starting with a base car, stripping it down, and building it back up as something far different from the stock model vehicle they started with.
For example, the long-standing lowrider communities in Southern California disassemble and create something beautiful, traditionally from Chevrolets. However, that auto transformation has nothing to do with what the powers that be at Chevy say or do. This is what is called transformative fandom. These fans take inspiration from one work that moved them to create something new-they transform it. For cars, this means building and modifying, yet it can take many forms, such as fan fiction, fan art, fan-edited videos, parody songs, and many others.
Understanding the different ways these fans choose to interact with the source material is key to any business. Neither curative nor transformative fandom is superior, but each has different needs. Often, curative fandom is what companies understand, and indeed the only aspect of fandom they market to, but being able to tap into both can be much more powerful. P92

This transformative way of interacting with media is not new. Roland Barthes, French philosopher, linguist, and critic, wrote an essay in 1967 entitled "The Death of the Author." (In fact, in the original French, la mort de l'auteur is a pun on Le morte d'Arthur, referencing another piece of literary fan fiction, Sir Thomas Malory's Arthurian tales.) In this essay, Barthes argues against the prevailing mode of criticism at the time that put the author at the center of the conversation. Instead, he insists that the meaning of a text does not come from the author. The author loses control of meaning as soon as the work is out in the public because as each reader has a different background, each brings their own context to interpret the work. Meaning is what comes from personal reactions to words on a page. P93

Meaning comes from a web of influence rather than one static idea.
It comes from thinking both about the CGI and the feminism in Game of Thrones. Fandom is one way of sharing our infinite meanings or distinct interpretations of creative works with one other, thus shaping our readings of the canon. We use fan works as a way of communicating our meaning, or interpretation, of what we enjoy with other fans— a narrative form of literary analysis. Just like Lin-Manuel Miranda shared his reading of American history through a lens of immigration and race, lesser known fans posting stories on Archive of Our Own share their own readings using the lenses through which they see the world. The environment of sharing is to everyone's benefit as it deepens and morphs our own understanding of the media we love by seeing it through one another's eyes. P93/94

Because many people in the fan fic community can't find stories that represent who they are in traditional media, they write their own. It was common in fandom to portray Hermione Granger from Harry Potter as black far before the English actress Noma Dumezweni was cast for the stage production Harry Potter and the Cursed Child. The desire for stories about queer relationships is one of the driving factors of the multitude of gay romance fan fiction. Fandom is where many people from marginalized communities can control their own consumption of media, transforming it to make it a more enjoyable and nuanced experience. When the majority of what we watch is from a male perspective, online communities give us an outlet to subvert those cultural narratives. Like Lin-Manuel Miranda, we take the works we love and create works that reflect our points of view. Letting go is a technique that we can use in all businesses and professions to build a fanocracy, because fan ownership of ideas is a powerful tool to spread the work. The professional also gains the most valuable feedback process ever created-the ability to see what their creation looks like from someone who has lived a completely different life. P94/95

The three basics to building a strong fan base are the same:

1. Know your audience.
2. Give your communities the correct resources and space.
3. Always treat your customers as humans.

"Always start with your audience. The who dictates the how, where, when, and why," says Vanessa DiMauro. She is the CEO of Leader Net-works, a strategic research and consulting firm that helps companies use digital and social technologies to gain competitive advantage. "Too often, organizations pile on the content when they're building a com-munity. They shove everything they've got into it and never think about the humans who will use it. That never goes well." P101

From the very start, when building a community, DiMauro says organizations need to bring customers into the creative process. "There must be an involved group of core members-ambassadors or friends of the firm-that partner pretty heavily with the organization in the social design of the community." These early engaged users will model behavior on communication, knowledge, and collaboration to set the tone and culture. Then, the company must slowly transfer authority and agency to the community. As DiMauro explains, "The goal is to move from 'sage on the stage' to 'guide on the side? You can't let the community completely run itself, because members don't have the backend data and knowledge. The ideal state is when the organization that sponsors the community acts on behalf of the community while balancing the goals of their organization."
DiMauro categorizes core members of online business communities into three different types according to what drives them: First, the experts. These members are often consultants or tech wizards who enjoy sharing what they know because it will build their own businesses.
Second are the connectors. These members are professionals and devotees who are in the community for the interaction and camaraderie.
Third, the disenfranchised. These members come to the platform only to solve a problem they can't solve on their own.
Understanding how each of these three different groups contributes to online interaction will allow your company to establish a stable, helpful community. According to DiMauro, "When brands design to understand their customer, to solve their problems, to meet their needs, to delight them on every front they can within reason, then the outcome will almost invariably be customer loyalty and advocacy.” In the past, marketing departments were charged with being the voice of the customer. The company was always in control of the mes-sage, and agency was taken away from the consumer. With online communities and public forums, this is no longer the case. If marketing professionals cling to the old ways by charging themselves with being the voice of the customer, they will miss what really matters to their fans. P102/103

Letting go doesn't always work the way the creators, or other fans, want. This extends to policing what is said in these communities.
DiMauro says companies have to step back. "The only true communities are the ones where people can say whatever they want," she says.
"Once organizations breach trust and eliminate the social capital of the community, then people stop talking. To succeed, you've got to create a safe space." P104

If our digital disconnect is the problem, doing what that surfer did for me that day offers a simple and powerful opportunity. We break transactional patterns by doing the opposite of what's expected. P111

<aside>
💡

The Grateful Dead was the first band that realized they were selling music.
Not records, not tickets, not T-shirts. Music. And one of the best ways to sell music was to get as many people exposed to that music as possible. P112

</aside>

The Grateful Dead gave away their music in the same way as the Hawaiian surfer gave me the wave, with no expectation of something in return. Fandom is built on human connection, and when you're given something of value completely free and with no obligation, you tend to share your appreciation with others. Fans copied and shared countless millions of Grateful Dead recordings when each of them passed on the gift of a cassette tape or download link to other fans. And all of this led back to the band that made it happen. P113

Gifts build fans and result in people sharing on social media and in person to their friends. A gift is often so unexpected that we can't help but feel compelled to talk about it. P125

The way older children and teenagers introduce themselves into adult-hood, out of the spotlight and within their own time, is with their identity around the things they enjoy. Their fandoms. The graphics of rock bands they wear on their T-shirts, the makeup tutorials they choose to follow, or the online forums they join are all more than what they seem from the outside. Sometimes, an initiation rite can include an element of perceived danger such as a first LSD experience in hippie culture. They are today's modern, self-directed rites of passage.
They are the way young people show us what sort of adults they are becoming.
In our research for this book, we asked several thousand people who identified a fandom they were involved with at what age they started to become interested in that subject. The median age of the responses was twelve years old. Isn't it interesting that age twelve is also the  same time we face new responsibilities and new challenges? Does that feel familiar? We develop new bodies and new hormones. Adversity seems to show up at that age more than it did before, in both what others expect of us and what we expect from ourselves. School, bullies, peer pressure, and friendships all suddenly seem so much bigger or more intense than we had previously faced. Consciously forming an identity was an answer to that because it offered us a source of stability in an otherwise intimidating world.
We build, piece by piece, our identities using both family tradition and pop culture references. And still, even after decades of identity building, those early steps into adulthood formed the basis of who we would become. Those brands and experiences stay with us. P130/131

For Spartz, creating and managing MuggleNet was his vehicle into adulthood-into the fandom he'd be a part of his whole life, as well as his career. It was a way of taking something he liked, these books he'd read over and over again, and making it his. "When you passively read something, you're stepping into a universe that somebody else created. You're making a copy of yourself and that copy exists in the form of a character. You become Harry and you save the world," he told us. "But when you participate in the creation of the world, you are taking ownership of the idea, the content, yourself. Like in business, getting stock in a company creates ownership and thus makes people want to work harder to grow the value of the business. Participating in the creation of content around a world can make you feel like an owner." P133

through pop culture because he understands that people give emotional weight to decisions that are tied to their identity.
To many young people, what bands they listen to, what clothing they wear, and what celebrities they follow on social networks are ways to show others who they are. Even the most mundane decisions about what products teens choose can be shaped by personal story. P155

"Some brands can indicate cool status, or counterculture status.
Brands, whether they're technology, consumer, or retail, play a huge role in the adolescent life in that they are used to communicate identity-how they see themselves and their place in the world." So what is the difference between a brand that is successful among Gen Z and one that fails? Inniss says it's about knowing that brands have a power to mean more and using that platform to their advantage.
Especially in socially responsible ways. "There's a recent Nielsen survey where 72 percent of the teenage cohort said they were willing to pay more for products and services that were committed to positive social or environmental impact," Inniss says. "There's a sense of tightened social awareness that is undercurrent, that is a theme, to Generation Z." How does this expand to all fanocracies? A shoe can become more than a shoe because it means something to the individual in their life outside the product. A certain product means that kids know what's cool or they follow or try to mirror certain celebrities. A shoe itself tells a story about the wearer. In the same way, many young people choose brands that are socially conscious because they know it will reflect back on them, as if to say, *I chose this brand because I want to be seen as caring about the environment." It carries weight in decision making because it reflects how these young people think of themselves and how they want to be seen by others. P136/137

No matter how it manifests within a company or professional, what matters is understanding that stories have a value in themselves. What brands can learn from Rosewater's insight is that developing products that value flexibility-the capacity for each individual to take a mass-produced product and somehow make it their own-pays enormous dividends as those individuals continually invest in and trust the brand. They become fans because-even though the product is mass produced-they are able to assign emotional weight to decisions about how they use the product. Providing room for the individual to incorporate a product into their lives is a quality that will make it successful because people care about expressing themselves as individuals. P140

When customers have the opportunity to establish an emotional bond with others as a result of doing business with you, it sticks. They feel compelled to experience it again and tell others about the fantastic experience you gave them. Ultimately, this is what will inspire passion and build your own fanocracy. P148

Beyond the Transaction: When organizations set out to provide a product or service, they typically make the crucial mistake of believing that they are only there to provide that product or service—as if they were merely there to fulfill a transaction. Is this the fastest, biggest, cheapest? Why should I buy your product instead of the other company's offering? Frequently, a focus on product attributes results in a race to the bottom with price discounts and shoddy service. This is not a way to build a fanocracy. In a world where breaking through the clutter of competitive offerings presents a challenge to organizations of all kinds, we see many attempts to stand out in the opposite way as well—not with discounts, but by offering extra perks, upgraded service, and enhanced products. But such approaches are usually just a bit of bling on top of a standard offering. These kinds of business models don't lead to creating fanoc-racies either. That's because typical consumers don't see the enhancement as something special or unique. Instead, they assume they are paying for the entire offering inclusive of the "extra." They see through the bribe. Been there, done that. P164

ple, where it's impossible for people to participate this way, allow fans to be a part of the creation process? It turns out that technology can play a huge role in bringing fans closer to artists.
Consider the British rock band Coldplay and their use of LED wristbands at their shows. Upon entry to the venue, each fan is handed a Xylobands wristband, a radio-controlled system that's run by the band's production crew. Multiple flash patterns are programmed on the full-color LEDs on every audience member's wristband to create a light show that every fan is a part of. Fans love them because the audience comes together as one with the artist to create a single, flashing, colorful organism.
Similar effects can be programmed to work on smartphones that people can hold in the air to be part of a show, a technology used by American electronic musician Dan Deacon. While the smartphone technology Deacon uses is less expensive than Coldplay's purchase of tens of thousands of wristbands for each show, fans must download the app ahead of time to be a part of the fun.
It's particularly fitting for Deacon because he is renowned by fans for his live shows. Reiko and I attended a Deacon show at Lollapalooza in Chicago a few years ago where he had nearly the entire audience throwing empty water bottles in the air at particular times, making fans a major element of the performance. Even though we saw a few dozen acts that weekend, one of the most memorable for us was Deacon's because he had us participating in creating the fun. We were an active part of the show!
During Coldplay's famous anthem "Yellow," everyone's wristbands light up, you guessed it, yellow! Most of the time the wristbands are dark, but during peak moments in the show, such as in the middle of
"Charlie Brown," lead singer Chris Martin tells fans, "Put your hands in the air!" and a stadium full of wrists sync to the song he's singing.
Just like the way a handful of customers come together for four days to build wooden surfboards, tens of thousands of Coldplay fans come together for a few hours, and the wristbands make everybody a part of the show. When people participate in this way, the bonds create a fanocracy.
"Coldplay showed me how important the fan experience is, it's fan to fan," Nate Tepper told us. Tepper is the CEO and cofounder of Har-mony, an app that empowers fans to vote on songs they want to hear at upcoming concerts. "In a sea of seventy thousand people, everyone is lighting up the same color at the same beat and I've never felt more connected to seventy thousand people. It was emotional and powerful to be one with the band and the music. I didn't even need to look at the band onstage to feel that. It's cooler to look at the lights because each light is another human being." P176/177

right then to solve the favorite song problem, so he created Harmony. Hundreds of artists, including Taylor Swift, U2, Ed Sheeran, Beyoncé, Muse, Tim McGraw, and Matchbox Twenty, use Harmony to communicate directly with fans. Harmony has a partnership with Ticketmaster where fans who purchase tickets are emailed a link to help create a set list, and then the bands share the link through social networks including Facebook and Instagram. Fans are taken to a unique Harmony page for each show and can vote on what songs should be played.
Fans can also upvote their favorite songs for a small fee, and the money from each vote goes to charities supporting homelessness, autism, suicide prevention, and cancer research. The more fans vote, the better the chance the artist will play their requested songs and the bigger the social impact. Some people vote dozens or in a few cases hundreds of times, yet fans only pay if the artist plays their chosen song.
The song request concept links fans to artists. When fans are empowered by influencing the set list, they take part in developing the show and feel a personal connection with the artist that they don't otherwise have. Fans take the time preshow to choose songs, and when an artist actually does play that song the fan chose, it gives a powerful jolt at the concert. The fan thinks, I did this. I helped make that song hap-pen! That's especially true when the artist thanks fans for voting, as some do from the stage.
"We survey fans after shows and they tell us that when the artist plays their favorite song, they feel like they were a part of creating the experience," Tepper says. "It's amazing for them, like a direct line to the artist where you can influence the set list and the artist listens.
Some fans tell us stories of why a song means so much to them and how they ended up getting to that show. It might be a couple and it's their wedding song. When the artist actually plays the song that they wanted to hear it's a moment of pure joy, a true moment of connection between an artist and a fan."
Artists love Harmony too, because when somebody uses the app to select an artist's song, that person's email address is shared with the artist so they can include it in their mailing list and connect more closely with fans. That's important because the ticketing companies don't share fan contact information with artists.
As I was writing this, I received an email from Ticketmaster with the subject line "What If Jack White Played All Your Favorite Songs?" The email was from Ticketmaster based on my purchase of Jack White tickets, and the link pointed to the Harmony app. I chose a few songs including "Lazaretto," "Temporary Ground, and "Sixteen Saltines" for Jack White to play. A week or so later I was at the show. I was excited when White and his band kicked into "Laza-retto" as the second song of the show and later on played "Sixteen Sal-tines." Just by choosing the songs on the Harmony app, I felt more connected to White. It made me feel a little bit like an insider, even though thousands of others might have selected the same songs! На!
Feelings trump reality every time! P178/179/180

The issue is, it is almost impossible for us to undo this sort of "logi-cal framing" once it occurs. When we strip people of their personalities and mark them instead as mere tasks or objects to be handled, we miss key data points. We misdiagnose and alienate. We degrade any trust that might have existed. And then, inevitably, our work with them suffers. We assume we know more about them than they do themselves, ignoring any protest or disagreement.
Over the course of my training as a medical student, I've grown used to answering multiple-choice questions, each with one correct answer. The single best thing to do. But Henry rejected that "correct" answer because it didn't fit his own personal story.
Henry was right, of course, for him. His response made me look more closely at the world around me. Where else do we need to remember that we are not robots? Where else do we have to know ourselves as clearly as Henry to make bold decisions that maybe no one but ourselves will understand? P190

Your customers have lives beyond their digital footprint, and once you learn more about them, you inspire loyalty. P191

As a consumer, do you sometimes feel like communications automation has made life difficult? Or like you're just another email address unknowingly added to a list of untold millions of others? You can shout as loud as you want into a satisfaction survey, but do you feel you are being heard? So what do you do?
You might decide, like our New Jersey grill aficionado who takes
pride in his cherished cookouts, to move on to the next brand.
What do all of these numbers, lists, and facts mean to you? Does it feel as though companies have turned you and your family into an abstraction? Have they separated themselves from the you that is your story? This is the process of dehumanization, depriving you of your ability to have thoughts or feelings of your own.
In short, technology cannot re-create the emotional weight of decisions made by a person who's spent their entire life forming their own personal story.
That essential piece will always be missing when the digital dominates the experience. The only way to reverse the trend is by learning how to explore the emotional significance of the decision that clients have to make through understanding their stories.
That's where narrative comes in. P193

A fandom business is human centered instead of data obsessed. P203

"We all have passion inside of us, but what ignites that passion is different for each of us," she told us. "So businesses need to know how to appeal to every type of customer, and also need to know that we aren't all motivated or inspired about the same things. But that doesn't mean you can't make your business or product attractive to all those people. It's understanding the different desires that are out there and [being] able to market for each type of person.’ P204

Are you a live music fan like Reiko and me? Like us, do you get frustrated at the difficulty of purchasing good seats to the shows and concerts you are eager to see? We've found the ticketing process for many shows is murky at best, yet some popular acts work hard to ensure that the best seats get into the hands of the biggest fans.
In some cases, this means less revenue for the artist in the short term. However, by helping the average fan to get a ticket at a reasonable price, that band's fans will continue to come back year after year, tour after tour, meaning that fan ultimately puts more money in the artist's bank account than if the fan had been gouged early on.
It's worth taking a look at how ticketing works in America and considering how some bands have approached the process to create a fanocracy. The methods used here can help us find ways to build transparency and truth into our own businesses.
Most bands put their tickets for shows up for sale on Ticketmaster or other electronic sales outlets knowing that the best seats will be snapped up by ticket brokers using bots that automatically purchase tickets and then resell them at a markup on third-party sites like Stub-Hub. It has become standard industry practice. Yet as a fan, do you get frustrated when you log in to a ticket service the first second a hot show goes on sale and find the system only has seats available in the second balcony of the theater or the top tier of the arena? When that happens, do you want to buy? What's even more frustrating is when you go to StubHub or other ticket broker sites and see that hundreds or even thousands of the best seats to the show, which you weren't able to get, are available at prices double or triple face value, sometimes more.
How does that make you feel?
Sadly, many bands are complicit in this practice and hold back their own tickets for resale on secondary markets. They profit while their biggest fans are left irritated and confused. Band management often has a short-term, take-the-easy-way-out mentality. It's a lot easier and less risky for them to let the brokers take thousands of seats, because those brokers then take the risk if the show does not prove popular. It's not uncommon for brokers to dump tickets at a loss when the show date comes near for shows that don't sell well. Needless to say, this practice by bands and their managers does not build a loyal fan base, Some bands blame the brokers, the bots, and the electronic ticket services, saying their hands are tied and they can't combat the practice of the best tickets going to scalpers. Yet they do have a choice. If they took it as their responsibility to treat their fans right, they could build a fanocracy that would last for years, or even decades.
However, there are positive things happening on the ticketing front with many bands, their management, and the ticketing industry working to solve the problem.
In 2016, Ticketmaster launched Verified Fan, a service that uses an algorithm to determine who among its customers are actual fans versus bots (or people) who buy tickets for resale. I have purchased tickets to many shows using Verified Fan, and it works well. When the super-popular Broadway show Hamilton came to Boston, I was able to get the hot tickets through Ticketmaster Verified Fan. The platform knows, through my buying behavior over the years, that I am a music fan, and therefore I got a special code.
However, only a few hundred artists are using the system as we write this. It's up to the artists to sign up to be a part of Verified Fan to treat fans with respect. Bruce Springsteen, for example, used Verified Fan for tickets to his run of hugely popular Broadway shows. According to Rolling Stone, only 3 percent of those tickets were resold on the secondary markets, indicating that Springsteen's fans were in the house with tickets they purchased directly. Other acts experimenting with Verified Fan to bypass the multibillion-dollar ticket-scalping business include Pearl Jam, Tom Waits, Jack White, Ed Sheeran, and Harry Styles.
Some artists are experimenting with other ways to combat the ticketing problem and are transparent about how they sell tickets.
Enlightened artists have gone to paperless ticketing, which requires fans to show identification (typically an ID or the credit card used to purchase the tickets) at the entrance for admittance. This approach means that the fan who purchased the original ticket (plus those who are entering together with the ticket purchaser) is the only one who can use it to get in. However, this approach can mean long lines to get into a venue because each person needs to be checked at the door.
Other artists have set up fan clubs that offer members first crack at tickets for shows. The National's Cherry Tree, Dave Matthews Band's Warehouse, and Jack White's Vault are examples of clubs where fans pay a yearly membership fee and are given preferred access to tickets to shows.
Another approach is to use dynamic pricing, similar to how airlines price seats. Prices change as the show gets closer, and fans can choose when to pay. Like on an airplane, the person sitting next to you might have paid a different price, but by ticketing in this way, fans buy tickets on the primary market with the revenue going to the artists.
The Rolling Stones have been using dynamic pricing for recent tours, and they are open and transparent about how they price. When shows are announced, fan club members are the first to have access, followed by the public. But even to their fans, the best tickets are very expensive during the start of sales, much like the business class seats available on international flights six months from a travel date. If you want to lock in the best seats, great, but you have to pay up. The Stones try to price near what the secondary market would bear for the seats closer to the stage, with some of the best going for over a thousand dollars each.
Then, just like frequent airline fare sales, unsold Stones tickets are offered to fans a few weeks before the show. During the last tour, the band offered a "Lucky Dip" ticket system where people could purchase a pair of tickets at a reasonable price, but they did not know where they would sit until they arrived at the venue, The two people had to show up together, the purchaser presented ID, and the random pair of tickets were provided on the spot. The twist was that the ticket holders had to enter the venue immediately, ensuring that the tickets weren't resold outside. The ticketing industry has a way to go to earn back the respect
of fans.Soon they'll realize that when the best fans get the best seats, everybody wins. Creating a fanocracy by authentically working with fans, understanding their frustrations, and demonstrating how important they are is good business. P220/221/222/223/224

HubSpot summarizes its Culture Code as these attributes:

1. Culture is to recruiting as product is to marketing.
2. Whether you like it or not, you're going to have a culture.
Why not make it one you love?
3. Solve for the Customer-not just their happiness, but also their success.
4. Power is now gained by sharing knowledge, not hoarding it.
5. "Sunlight is the best disinfectant."
6. You shouldn't penalize the many for the mistakes of the few.
7. Results should matter more than when or where they are produced.
8. Influence should be independent of hierarchy.
9. Great people want direction on where they're going- not directions on how to get there.
10. "Better a diamond with a flaw than a pebble without."
11. We'd rather be failing frequently than never trying. P240

Two important drivers of the HubSpot culture are the focus on autonomy and transparency. "My hope for every HubSpotter when they work here is not just that they become better engineers or marketers, but that they ideally become better people and better professionals and betfer entrepreneurs," Burke says. "To do that they need access to information they wouldn't normally have as part of their job. For me it's a great source of pride that people who just started on their team as interns can read wiki posts from cofounders Brian and Dharmesh on what they're thinking about business strategy. That is a really powerful force of learning."
This kind of openness and transparency is sometimes difficult for executives who are used to a traditional hierarchical, command-and control management style. "You have to be transparent when it’s not convenient for you," Burke says. "You have to be transparent even when it feels difficult. It's something we all hold each other accountable to." P241

Many of us worry that pouring our hearts into the activities we love will affect how others see us. That somehow it will clond our judgment and turn as into those clueless fanatics we so often hear about-the gamer in his basement, or the brainless screaming sports fan. Fandom, for some people, is relegated as escapism, deemed childish or a waste of time. Not something for "professionals." For a long time, I was besitant to share what I liked because I was self-conscious about how i might be perceived.
It took effort and courage for my friends and me to dress up as the Morrigan, yet when we did, we found that we weren't putting on another persona. Rather, we were reflecting a part of ourselves that we couldn't show any other way. For me, it was a way for me to be true. authentic-more so than I could ever be on the curated version of myself I post online. I enjoyed myself more, and I felt I could inspure enthusiasm in others. Jamie McKelvie saw the work we put into out cosplay and couldn't wait to share his excitement with his followers os social media. Our outpouring of our passions didn't go unnaticed Perhaps even more significantly, while I'd done cosplay before. & was my first year in a group costume. The fandom I'd shared with my friends tied us together, just as our love for the life of a fan tied us to other attendees dressed as their favorite characters.
All of these things amount to a common language of fanocracy. It is the understanding of you, as an individual and as part of a group.
And isn't that what you want with your friends? With your col-leagues? With your customers? With the people you want to work with in organizations or as collaborators? Isn't the ability to share a vast range of experiences-activities and obsessions people have devoted their time and energy to—an exquisitely positive thing? Isn't that also what you want for yourself?
If you hide that thing within you that drives you to dive deep into what you love and enjoy it with your full being-that spark-nobody will see you at your truest self. On the other hand, when we engage ourselves fully in our fandoms, that spark will ignite inside us and spread to others.
Fandom is not wish fulfillment or escapism. It isn't about work-life balance or a mindless activity just to relax. Instead, it's a way that more and more people can solve a fundamental problem of isolation. It is what the most engaged and fulfilled people do to enhance their lives.
You can see it in their behavior: they seem to laugh and smile more, joke about their mistakes, take life lightly, and enjoy themselves. P254/255