# Fans

Author: Michael Bond
Publication Date: 2023
Year Read: 2024

Fannish devotion is a gregarious impulse. It is possible to be a solitary fan and to worship from afar, but at some point most of us want to vent our passions with others, to pay homage with fellow enthusiasts. 'If you love something that much, you want to share it, you want to reach out to other people and talk about it,' says Kathy Larsen, who studies fan cultures at George Washington University. P2

Fans of Billie Holiday in the 1940s were no less emotional and committed than fans of Billie Eilish are today. Even before the invention of the word
'fan', young city-dwellers in the US flocked to concert halls with a zeal that alarmed their elders. 'Fandom is often characterized in media studies as a product of mass consumer culture in the twentieth century,' notes the cultural historian Daniel Cavicchi, who spent several years studying the diaries, scrapbooks and letters of music-lovers of the nineteenth century. Yet the basic practices associated with fandom - idealized connection with a star, strong feelings of memory and nostalgia, use of collecting to develop a sense of self, for example - precede the development of electronic "mass communication" technologies." P6/7

researchers at Virginia Tech University found that sports fans and political supporters process new information about their team or party in much the same way, by filtering it through the lens of group affiliation. What matters to people is not the information itself so much as the way it reflects on their group. Fans have always shown a dogged and sometimes irrational allegiance to their tribe, a trait that has become endemic in party politics.' P7

One of the curious things about the Partygate scandal was that Boris Johnson managed to retain so much support even after he had lost the moral argument. So long as our guy is ahead, do we care what they actually do? P8

when you love something that other people love, many of the traditional social boundaries fall away. We join them not so much to be entertained as to experience a particular reality, to broaden our perspective, to connect with like-minded others or to find meaning in life. This is not so different to why people participate in a religion, sign up to a political party or even join the army. Fandoms have all the power and influence of those institutions, and they are driven by the same fundamental psycho-social forces. P10

The human brain is wired to reach out. While those groupish tendencies can bring much strife, they are also the source of some of our greatest satisfactions. Fandoms offer the pleasures of tribalism with less of the harm: a feeling of belonging and shared culture, a sense of significance and purpose, improved mental well-being, reassurance that your most outlandish convictions will be taken seriously and the freedom to emulate (and dress like) your heroes. P11

The minimal group experiments showed that people require little prompting to categorize themselves with others and to favour members of their own group over anyone else. Groupishness - the dance of 'us' and 'them' - is a certainty of social life. We categorize people all the time, on lines of race, gender, class, religion, nationality, profession and so on, to help us understand our social environment. This might be a reflection of our ancient past, when survival depended on cooperation and the ability to distinguish friend from foe. We evolved to live in groups, a reality that shapes almost everything we do. P15

group membership gives people a distinct identity - they called it a 'social identity' - and that this provides
'some kind of meaning to an otherwise empty situation'? A social identity gives us a sense of ourselves in relation to others: we are who we are because of what we share with our in-group and what we don't share with those outside it. Social identity is separate from personal identity, which reflects individual traits such as physical appearance and personality. During those moments when you feel an integral part of a group - watching a football match, for example, or attending a Star Trek convention - your social identity (We're Trekkies!') will be more prominent than your personal one. P16

The groups we belong to have a big influence on our behav-iour. We rapidly adopt their norms and needs, their ways of thinking and doing. They become a part of us just as we become a part of them. Group membership is transient: we can have many social identities, only one of which is likely to be active at any one time. If you work as a nurse, you may wear a uniform and fill your conversation with medical terminology while you're at the hospital, but you're unlikely to do that when you're with your college friends (unless they're also nurses). Most of us find slipping between our various social worlds as easy as putting on a new coat. Each world demands something different of us: a different identity, a different self. If you've ever made a friend in one environment (at work, say) and then observed them in another (with their family), you'll know how surprising and even disconcerting it can be to watch someone skip across their group boundaries. P16/17

 Brain imaging studies show that we generate more neural activity in the emotional centres of our brain when we interact with 'insiders' than when we interact with 'outsiders'," In-group favouritism appears to be our natural default. P17

When people form a group, two things happen. The first is that the group feels compelled to distinguish itself from others - to signal its uniqueness. Its members may do this by wearing idiosyncratic colours (in a sports team), adopting an arcane ritual (in a faith group) or advocating a particular worldview (in a political party). The second thing is the pursuit of status: everyone wants their group to be as successful or prestigious as possible and tries to make it so. P19

The most avid sports fans don't think of themselves as supporters of their team. They're greater than that: they are their team. In the language of Tajfel and Turner, their group identity overrides their personal one to the extent that they feel a part of it as much as any of the players. In Fever Pitch, Nick Hornby's memoir of life as a fan of Arsenal Football Club, he describes his obsession as an 'organic connection'. 'One thing I know for sure about being a fan is this,' he writes. 'It is not a vicarious pleasure, despite all appearances to the contrary, and those who say that they would rather do than watch are missing the point.
Football is a context where watching becomes doing." P23

You can tell fans who identify strongly with their team by the way they speak. They might say, 'We won' or 'We lost', never
'They won' or "They lost'. In social science, this use of the first person pronoun is known as the 'categorized we'. It allows the speaker to extend the boundaries of the self, to create a special category of inclusiveness. The only time the categorized we is heard outside of sports fandoms is when it is used to express national identity, as in 'We won the war' - which tells you a lot about a sports fan's level of engagement. P23

The quality of connection matters. For a group to have healing powers - to offer protection from stress, increase resilience, speed up recovery or meet certain psychological needs - it has to feel emotionally significant. Part of the reason for this is that people who regard each other as members of the same club - who share a social identity - are much more likely to help each other out.
But feeling that we belong bestows its own psychological gifts: companionship, increased self-esteem, a sense of purpose, a feeling of control, a moral compass. It allows us to extend our loci of concern beyond our own well-being, to reach for a grander narrative for our lives and to find something meaningful in the things we share with others. P30

Being a fan allows you to be radical in original ways.
Depeche Mode enjoyed a huge following in Eastern Europe during the Soviet era among people who wanted an alternative means to channel their frustration with the status quo. We are Depeche-ist, like Communist, or Fascist, declares one fan in The Posters Came from the Walls, a documentary about the band's global following." To this day, Russian fans celebrate 'Dave Day' on lead singer Dave Gahan's birthday, which also happens to be a national holiday, giving them a perfect excuse to parade their Depeche-ist sympathies. P32

The media studies scholar Henry Jenkins defined fandom as a vehicle for marginalised subcultural groups (women, the young, gays etc) to pry open space for their cultural concerns' 4 Groups like these can become powerful forces for social change. In 2015, Rainbow Direction, a collective of LGBTQ fans of the boy band One Direction who had come together to fight homophobic bullying, achieved maximum recognition when members of the band started wearing their rainbow bracelets on stage. Social interaction is the psychological fuel for this kind of activism. P32/33

building connections with others is an evolutionary imperative that drives much of our behaviour. Yet it can be hard to achieve: other people can be difficult, and relationships can make us vulnerable. It isn't very surprising that people sometimes prefer to invest their social energy in a fictional character and settle for a relationship over which they have greater control. Think of the advantages.
Fictional characters are always available. They'll never ghost you.
They have dependable personalities: you know what you're in for. And since a lot of other people are bound to like them too, they can bring a ready-made circle of human friends - like Priyanka Bose's Miraculous group, or the many friendships that have grown out of a mutual love for Harry Potter. P37

Henry Jenkins, the media studies scholar, describes Comic-Con as 'a field of dreams' and cosplay as a way of making those dreams public." But the dreams are aspirational as well as fantas-tical. Cosplay allows fans to push the limits of what they can be and to experiment with their identities in playful ways. Cosplayers often deliberately pick characters that are very different from themselves, or characters of a different gender (known as crossplay), or even of a different age, just to see what it feels like.
Some choose characters with antisocial traits that they share but usually conceal - a chance to release their inner Darth Vader or Voldemort." Others embrace characters they would like to emulate, whose qualities or values they admire. In a study of 198 cosplayers recruited via social media, the psychologist Robin Rosenberg quotes a respondent who has wanted to cosplay as Wonder Woman for as long as she can remember: Wonder Woman was a beautiful princess, but strong and inde-pendent. She took care of herself and everyone she cared about, and didn't need a prince to rescue her. Those were important qualities to me growing up in an all-woman household... In Wonder Woman I saw the best qualities of my mother, and the type of woman I wanted my sister and I to become. I've always idolized her from childhood and wanted to be' her when I grew up." P43

in their fursona personalities, they scored significantly higher than in their everyday personalities on every trait, particularly extraversion. Changing their outer identity appeared to change their inner one. 'Fursonas tend to be bigger, larger-than-life versions of the self, says Plante. 'So, happier and funnier, more outgoing and confident. But also more serious, more studious, friendlier. It's an idealised version.
This principle applies to other fandoms too. When Reysen assessed the personalities of sports enthusiasts in both fan and non-fan mode, he found a similar pattern, though the direction and magnitude of the changes were different. In team mode, sports fans were more extraverted but less conscientious, less agreeable and less emotionally stable. That sounds about right: on the terraces at a football match or in the bleachers at a baseball game, irascibility and confrontation are the norm. Being a fan may be transformative, but each fandom transforms us in its own unique way. P47

In her presentation, Merrick talked about the friendships she has made as a member of fandoms and a writer of fan fiction, and how they have 'changed everything' for her. 'Fandoms give people power, she said. Later, I asked her what she meant. She explained that in the wake of the Black Lives Matter movement, it had become clear that society is often blind towards people who are different. 'Can you imagine being an asexual autistic dyslexic person? You're so specialized and so small that you're invisible. If the entire black community is invisible, what chance do you have of being seen? But then you write a story and somebody reads it, or you read a story and you recognize yourself in it. You see that you are valid. That's the power.’ P55

The audience seemed caught between rapture and melancholy as if calling to mind a happy memory they didn't want to let ga. Outside, I asked a Glasegian couple, Billy and Sandra Madden, what the music meant to them.
They had grown up in the 196os, and the Beatles provided the soundtrack to their youth, they said. The songs acted as memory markers for the things that had happened to them and the people they had met. P72

In 2015, the men's magazine GQ described the audience at a One Direction concert as 'an ocean of 20,000 wide-open mouths, hundreds of pleading white eyes, 40,000 palms raised skywards, a dark-pink oil slick that howls and moans and undulates with every impish crotch-thrust from their idols' plinths' 2 The writer, a thirty-four-year-old man, admitted that he had left the gig early, complaining about what he called
'the shrill sonic boom of a whole generation of women coming of age. He had made a common ethnographic error in trying to judge the norms of an in-group by contemplating it from the outside. The first impulse of those who don't understand a culture has often been to rage against it. P75

While most celebrities are careful to protect themselves from the excesses of fandom, the demands of their most persistent fans can be hard to deal with. Recently, Nancy Baym, a communications scholar at Microsoft Research, interviewed dozens of well-known performers for a study on the interaction between musicians and their audiences." Nearly all her subjects, who included Billy Bragg, Lloyd Cole, Kristin Hersh from the rock band Throwing Muses and Roger O'Donnell, keyboard player in The Cure, told her that a small number of fans assume the relationship is mutual and mistake their adulation for friendship. This false intimacy can be unsettling; it is hard for performers to strike a balance. They can try to distance themselves from fans who communicate too much or with too much intensity, but they often rely on the familiarity of social media to keep their audiences close, resulting in mixed messages. Fans love being party to their idols' private lives. Those who follow Ariana Grande on Instagram will have seen her feeding pizza to her dog or model-ling a dress in her home. Katy Perry, who has a bigger audience on Twitter than any other woman, is well known for opening up to her followers in this way. On a typical occasion a while back, she tweeted twelve times over the course of a week, offering titbits of personal information such as her love of tacos, her delight at cherry trees coming into blossom and her support for a presidential candidate. Most fans revel in such intimacies; for a few, it can lead to a morbid fixation. P79

isolated. Fandoms are inherently social - often joyously so - which accounts for many of the psychological benefits they bring. One of the incentives for being part of a fandom is that you get to do things with others. You might go to the same gigs, or rave together on social media about an artist's new album. At the extreme end of the scale, the opposite is true. Pathological fans are inherently anti-social. They hunt alone, and their isolation fuels their dysfunctionality, since they have no one to temper their fantasies or the appropriateness of their emotions. P82

Today, as well as writing and producing music, Jones researches and lectures in social theory - including fan behaviour - at Bath Spa University, a role that has helped him reflect on his experience with Gay Dad and, more generally, the relationship between artists and their audiences. He says it is crucial for an artist to realize that they can never control their public persona, which is based not so much on who they are but on what their fans want from them. 'As a performer you have to accept that what other people think about you is as valid as what you think about your-self. You provide a social function: you become a cipher for a set of values or ideas that they may wish to share or embody as a group. What's damaging for artists is when they take that seriously and push back and say, no, I'm not like that. It's easier to give the fans some of what they need, because at some point you have to admit that you are complicit in it. I didn't really understand that until it was too late.’ P84

The therian community defines itself as a fandom and shares many of the psychological characteristics of regular fandoms. Therians are on a quest for identity, meaning and a sense of belonging just like Janeites, Trekkies and Potterheads. More than any other fandom, they illustrate the protective effects of being part of a group: their life experience and their psychology are so different to most people's that they often feel profoundly isolated until they find each other. P118

Popular culture, rich in imagery and metaphor, is often where young people start their search for meaning. P124

I heard similar versions of this story over and over from different therians. Caesar the coyote told me that his introduction to the community was 'unquestionably one of the happiest moments of my life: finding out that you're not alone, that these feelings and experiences do have some validity beyond myself, that I'm not necessarily on a deserted island after all'. Blayz, who spent years trying to figure out his strange canine sensations, came close to dismissing them as 'the delusions of a madman, nothing more than a side-effect of mental illness'. When he discovered that he wasn't the only one who felt this way, it was like an enormous avalanche of "aha" moments all at once. P137

As with any social group, the therian community entertains plenty of drama; therians disagree with each other like anyone else. There are differences of opinion, for example, over the causes of therianthropy, the distinction between therians and otherkin, and whether it is appropriate to discuss the sexual feelings that some therians have towards animals." But the prevailing impression is that the community is a source of great strength, and that many therians would be lost without their therian family. In this way, it resembles other fandoms. Social psychologists have found that members of minority or disadvantaged groups who experience persistent prejudice or criticism respond by identifying more closely with their own group, offsetting any potential harm with the psychological advantages of belonging. It might sound paradoxical, but stigma can become a strength when shared with others. P138

The shadow of the negative stereotype does not fall on all fans equally. Sports fans are rarely shamed for being excessively zealous their commitment to the cause is expected, even applauded. P143

sports fans - and particularly male sports fans - continue to get a pass across the board? In an interview a few years ago, she explained:
The degree of ridicule that a male sports fan experiences - even if he paints himself half-green and half-white and goes to an Eagles game half-naked - is vastly different than the potential ridicule tossed at a male media fan who paints himself green and white and goes to Comic Con half-naked as an alien something-or-other.*
Sports is one of the few male-dominated fandoms, and it's possible that the shaming of pop culture fandoms, which tend to be female-dominated, is partly a response by some men to what they perceive to be inappropriate behaviour by women.
Fortunately, in recent years it has become easier for fans of all kinds to show their colours without being humiliated for it.
Zubernis suggests this is due to the proliferation of social media platforms such as Tumblr, Reddit, Facebook, Instagram and Twitter, each of which has its own norms and values that determine what is acceptable. 'The sheer heterogeneity has changed how fans relate to each other and to the broader culture,' she told me over email.® Fan communities have become part of the mainstream, making it easier than ever to participate in the conversation. This hasn't stopped fans disrespecting other fans, or being disrespected by non-fans. Social media can be vile. P144

Stever had conducted a study of Jackson fans seventeen years earlier, and after he died some of them reconnected with her on Facebook. They were basically looking for people to grieve with;' she says. "They said, "We knew you'd understand." Psychologists have found that social media plays an important role in helping fans cope with the death of a favourite celebrity? By turning private grief into a public ritual, it allows them to connect with other people who 'get it', and to share their pain." (Studies have shown that at times of tragedy, having other people around to supervise your sadness generally leads to a healthier outcome.) On 1o January 2016, the day Bowie lost his fight against cancer, fans paid their respects by sending more than 2.3 million tweets with the hashtag #RIPDavidBowie (at its peak, this reached 20,000 every minute).!8 This is the modern way, but it is not the only way. That same night, thousands of people gathered on the streets of Brixton in South London, where Bowie grew up, to sing his songs, leave flowers and write epitaphs on the wall opposite the Tube station. Unlike the tweet cascade, this impromptu wake had a lasting impact, turning the neighbourhood into a permanent memorial and a pilgrimage destination for Bowie's fans. P149

How do characters who have never lived become so real? Why do they matter to us so much? In 2019, researchers at Erasmus University in Rotterdam asked fifteen fans of 'deceased' fictional characters how they had processed their grief and whether they took anything meaningful from their deaths. One of them, a young woman who had been particularly affected by the loss of Sirius Black in Harry Potter, had this to say:
You see how someone develops. When you get to know someone's layers, in different situations, you get attached to these people.
You form a connection, you know? The longer you follow someone, know someone ... It just becomes real." P151

If you are a fan of anything - a fictional character, a celebrity, a sports team - what happens to them to some extent happens to you too. Your self-esteem and sense of identity are tied to their success; you are vulnerable to their misfortunes. This is why some sports fans have a second team that they can turn to if their main one fails, and why some even bet against their team to off-set the potential emotional hit of losing It is why all fans suffer some cognitive dissonance when their heroes transgress or behave in a way that conflicts with their own core values. It can be disorientating when someone you love or identify with lets you down. Since J. K.
Rowling started sharing her controversial views about trans women - she believes that trans activism is eroding the rights and threatening the safety of cis-gender women - some of the Harry Potter fans who disagree with her have vowed never again to read her books or watch the films. They have become reluctant anti-fans, and not without considerable sorrow at the loss of a world that meant so much to them. P152

Psychological studies have shown that people who identify strongly with celebrities find it easier to excuse them when they offend: they manage to 'decouple' their wrongdoings from their achievements. This may be why so many of Tiger Woods' admirers stuck with him after he admitted in 2009 to having had multiple extramarital affairs, and why the jersey of basketball star Kobe Bryant remained a top seller after he was charged with sexual assault in 2003.* One explanation is that impassioned fans have invested too much in the relationship to contemplate their idol's fall from grace: if 1 acknowledge that my role model is a sinner, where does that leave me? In the case of Michael Jackson, this seems too simplistic an analysis. Those fans who rallied against the media in the wake of Leaving Neverland were not seeking to excuse him - they simply didn't believe that the allegations against him were credible. 'His fans would be more willing to give him the benefit of the doubt than other people, for sure,' says Mark Duffett, who studies popular music fandoms at the University of Chester. 'But if there was cast-iron proof [that the allegations were true], I think you would find a mass defection from the fandom very quickly. Those people who are heavily invested in him would go through some kind of grieving process.’ P154/155

As hard as we might try, it can be difficult to ignore what other people think of us and the things we cherish. After all, reputations count. Loyal fans often pretend to be impervious to criticism, but when public opinion turns against their idol - as it did with Michael Jackson - they are usually quick to defend them. P157