# For The Culture

Author: Marcus Collins
Publication Date: 2023
Year Read: 2023

Culture side-steps conventional value propositions, functional or category benefits, and mind-share marketing. It moves beyond a brand having the sharpest razor, the fastest car, or the longest-lasting battery. Culture supersedes all these product differentiators because it does not revolve around what the product is. Culture focuses on who we are.

Culture: as a system of symbols, beliefs, and values used by groups of people to establish norms and roles. Durkheim underscored the complexity of culture, as a "system" that defines a group of people, while also providing some elemental codes that collectively make up the system-shared beliefs (values and principles, a way of thinking), rituals (traditions, social norms), artifacts (symbols, clothes, decora-tions, tools), and, of course, language (dialect, lexicon, songs, poetry).
Durkheim called these elemental codes "social facts," a manner of thinking, feeling, and acting that is constructed by society at large. In this way, social facts are the collective representation of social behavior for a distinct group of people.

Williams defined culture as a realized signifying system, a system through which we interpret the world and make sense of it. This system, as Williams argued, is a whole way of life for people--a program for everyday living. It is through this system that we translate our daily experiences to inform how we respond to them because of what they mean. Culture is a realized meaning-making system. More accurately, it is a system of systems--a set of interdependent principles and mechanisms that all inform each other--which, collectively, influences practically everything that we do because of who we are and how we see the world.

Therefore, our cultural affiliation is anchored by how we self-identify-the categorical labels we use to tell people who we are and to associate with other people based on who they are. These labels range from geographical in nature (like where you're from) to institutions (the college you attended), activities (sports), consumption behavior (anime enthusiasts), and a host of seemingly endless designations that make up our identity. Identity is the cornerstone of culture.

On its surface, the concept of a shared belief is fairly straightfor-ward. It is the collective acceptance of a truth, the communal view of reality. Is there a God? Are there other life forms throughout the gal-axies? Was the moon landing a hoax? Should there be a separation of church and state? Are all men created equal? Is there no place for politics in sports? These held beliefs help us frame the endless amount of information that is transmitted from our senses to our brains so that we can make meaning of the world and know how to operate in it. Anaïs Nin is famously quoted as saying, "We don't see things as they are, we see them as we are." That is, the truth is not as objective as we would like to believe. The truth is culturally mediated and socially negotiated and constructed based on our communal view of reality-our beliefs.

Shared beliefs and ideologies are the least tangible system of culture but arguably the most important because this system precedes all others. It's because we hold certain beliefs deeply and emotionally-that we commit to certain behaviors, not the other way around. Although our beliefs and ideologies are not easily seen, they are reflected in everything we do. The anthropologist and culture scholar Grant McCracken wrote about how our everyday experiences are culturally constituted, shaped, and mediated by our beliefs and assumptions of right and wrong, just and unfair, acceptable and undesirable. It's our system of shared beliefs and ideologies that dictates what seems
"normal" and what seems "out of place" and therefore, it's this system that determines what gets adopted and what does not.

Audiences buy products because of their function. Congregations buy products as evidence of their beliefs.

Take generationalism, for instance- mil-lennials, gen Z, etc. These, too, are constructs that don't actually describe real people. These generational titles are arbitrarily assigned to a group of people based on their date of birth-a demographic. And we have a mental picture of who these people are. But there are eighty million millennials in the United States. How can we say that they are all the same just because they were born in a certain time span? People aren't governed by their demography; they are governed by their cultural sub-scriptions, which are reflected in their tribal memberships. This is about disposition, not demography. No wonder so many people don't take action when marketers try to get them to move. The marketers are targeting labels, not real people.
But tribes are real, and their members act together to promote social solidarity among themselves, which is superpowerful for anyone who aims to excite people to take action. 

Culture is a realized meaning-making system. It is anchored in our identity and shaped by our worldview, which subsequently influences what we do and how we consume.

to sell a brand, promote a candidate, or inspire people to join a cause, you must first look inward and ask yourself, "What does my brand be-lieve?" "How does my candidate see the world?" "What's the ideology of our cause?" This is where we want to start-identifying the brand's beliefs.
The brand belief should be the articulation of something substantive as opposed to vain platitudes and empty statements like, "We believe in integrity. While that may indeed be true, what you want to unearth is
"why does integrity matter to the brand?" What is the conviction that drives you and your company to have integrity? As we saw earlier in the chapter, Patagonia believes in "climbing clean" and that informs everything the brand does-from the products it makes to how it communicates its products. Patagonia's conviction to "climbing clean" is so strong that instead of taking the $3 billion company public or selling it off to the highest bidder, Yvon Chouinard and his family recently decided to give it away. In a September 2022 statement, Chouinard announced that he and his family were transferring ownership of the company to a trust and a nonprofit organization that will fund people who are actively working to save the planet. Now, that's conviction!
Identifying the belief system in this way is critical because it's your belief system that will inform whom you'll target-the people who are most likely to move because they share the same worldview. If your brand believes that life is an adventure and should be lived as such, then you can imagine the kinds of people you'd target: adventure seek-ers, X-Gamers, or adrenaline junkies. These are the people who see the world similarly to the brand, and they'll be more inclined to consume than most people would be, not (just) because of what the product is but also because of who these people are. As you identify your brand's belief, make a list of all the different communities that probably share the same belief system. Resist the urge to rely on demographics. In-stead, think about real collectives that already exist. Together, these networked tribes will make up your congregation. And once you've found your congregation, it's time to preach the gospel.

Instead of communicating its inventory selection and great customer service, REI decided to communicate its belief to the people who shared its worldview, and this activated people to move- to go outdoors and consume. Simply put, REI found its congregation- the collection of networked tribes who subscribe to the same beliefs and ideology as the brand-and preached the gospel to them, which inspired collective behavior.

the reptilian brain is the oldest part of the brain. It is associated with primitive bodily functions that we take for granted, like controlling our heart rate, breathing, and blinking. This brain system is also associated with the "fight or flight" response, which is involuntary because we're wired for it.
The second system of the brain is the limbic system. This part of the brain is associated with emotions like love, trust, and connection.
Within the limbic system live complex structures like the hippocam-pus--a structure that plays a major role in learning and the formation of memories--and the amygdala- a structure responsible for the emotional salience of our memories. These two structures work together in the limbic system to associate memories with emotions so that we know how to respond to stimuli in the world. It's no surprise that the amygdala is also connected to our "fight or flight" response based on the emotional experiences that have been logged into our long-term memory. As Jon T. Willie, a neurosurgeon and director of the laboratory for behavioral neuromodulation at Emory University in Atlanta, put it, "If you have an emotional experience, the amygdala seems to tag that memory in such a way so that it is better remembered" Ihis is likely why emotions flood our brains with rich memories when we hear a song that takes us back to a certain place and time when that song was prevalent in our lives. We become overwhelmed with the feelings associated with that emotional tag, which compels us to relive that experience or repel it. That's the limbic system at work.
Not only is the limbic system associated with emotions, but it is also a part of how we make decisions. That is to say, the part of the brain responsible for our feelings is also associated with how we decide what to do. We know this intuitively, but we call it "gut instinct." We feel it in our gut, and then we act accordingly. However, that association has nothing to do with our stomachs and everything to do with the activity that goes on in our limbic system. When it comes to "gut instinct" it's often difficult to put a finger on why we feel the way we do. It just feels like the right thing to do, so we do it; or it feels wrong, and we don't. What's worse is that we typically can't explain it, either. The rationale for these "gut instinct" decisions is hard to put into words. If someone asked me how I knew my wife was the woman I wanted to marry, I wouldn't have a clear answer. I just knew it. I can't put into words why, nor can I identify the exact moment that I knew. I felt it in my gut--the limbic system-and I went for it. This separation between articulation and "gut instinct" is also a factor of biology because language is not associated with the limbic system but rather it is a function of the third system of the brain, the neocortex.
The neocortex is the part of the brain where higher-order cognitive functions, like abstract thought, language, and rationality; are performed. Between the limbic system and the neocortex, we have one system that is associated with emotions and behavior--the lim-bic system-and another associated with language and rationality. 

We're not rational human beings; we're rationalizing human beings. We make most of our decisions based on shortcut heuristics that are informed by the emo-fional tags we place on our memory associations, which informs how we feel-and, ultimately, what we do.
The truth of the matter is that we know what decisions we're going to make before we make them based on how we feel. After that, we cherry-pick the data to support our feelings. In psychology, this is called the Texas sharpshooter fallacy, a cognitive bias in which we ignore the information that differs from our perspective and choose the data that supports it. This bias is based on the metaphor of a gunman who shoots at a wall and then draws the target around the bullet holes afterward--as is the case of our "rationality, or lack thereof. Our behaviors are biologically connected to our feelings--our limbic sys-tem. So if we want to get people to move, our best chance to do so is to appeal to the limbic system by activating the emotional side of the brain that informs behavior.
But how do we appeal to the limbic system? How do leaders pull at the emotional cords of the brain that catalyze behavior? How do marketers make connections that get people to move? We do so by speaking directly to the thing that makes us who we are: our identity-the anchor of culture--and our subsequent beliefs- the first system of our cultural subscriptions. When we communicate our beliefs to the people who hold the same ideological points of view, it resonates on a deeply emotional level that transcends rationality and inspires people to take action. Why? Because "people like me do something like this." That's the key.

C. Chapman put it simply: when we're trying to make emotional connections, our communications should "start with the soul and end with the sale." We begin with the emotional appeal, which is informed by how we see the world (appealing to the limbic system), and end with the rational argument that appeals to the neocortex. This approach can be applied to just about any context-marketing, leadership, politics, you name it-because it is based on our biology, not our circumstances.

We have all heard the refrain of Dr. King's "I Have a Dream" speech.
It has been cited as one of the best speeches ever delivered. But an interesting fact about the "I Have a Dream" speech is that Dr. King had delivered it several times before the famous rendition that we all know of from the March for Civil Rights and Equal Pay on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial in Washington, DC, on August 28, 1963. His first delivery was nine months earlier in North Carolina in November
1962. He had many drafts and iterations of the speech-retooling it, extending it here and shortening it there.
When he took the stage on August 28, 1963, he intended to give a different speech. It was at the behest of the legendary gospel singer Mahalia Jackson that Dr. King decided to change course. She said,
"Tell them about the dream, Martin" after having heard the speech in Detroit months prior, and he went on to give one of the most famous speeches of all time. What made that speech so powerful in that moment was not merely the mechanics of the speech but the conviction that was carried in his words.

people aware of the products and offerings of a company, institution, organization, or person. Historically, advertising has been product focused and led by value propositions (the sale) rather than being ideologically driven (the soul. That was not compelling to Phil.
It wasn't supercompelling to Dan Wieden and David Kennedy, either, which is why one of our isms in the agency today is "Start realizing that what you're supposed to be doing is not advertising; it's evangelizing the faith." We don't make ads for Nike; we preach the gospel that every human body is an athlete. Nike's approach to preaching the gospel to its congregation inspired other companies to adopt this means of communication, perhaps none more famously than Apple.

we all fall for something and behave accordingly, not because it's "true" per se but because it aligns with the story we tel ourselves about the world (ideology) and how we fit into the world (identity); therefore, we act in accordance with it (culture). All we need is for someone to preach the gospel so that we know what to do and how to act. Think of all the amazing things your organization sets out to do to make people's lives better and all the many ways your product might enrich people's day-to-day comings and goings. If preaching the gospel can influence people to buy into a shady product or a questionable company, imagine what it can do for a good product and an upright company.

Unlike traditional marketing communications, the reach that is achieved here is more than just people hearing a message from a company or brand. They hear about it from someone whom they trust, someone like them, which increases the likelihood of adoption for the next person. As the network scientists Nicholas Christakis and lames Fowler posited, "When a small group of people begin acting in con-cert--displaying similar visible symptoms-the epidemic can spread along social network ties via emotion contagion and large groups can become quickly emotionally synchronized. This is the network effect that is activated when you preach the gospel to the congregation of people who see the world the way that you do.

People, not marketing communications, convert people. Marketing communications create an exogenous shock to the system of the networked tribes - within a congregation-and, collectively, the members of the tribe decide whether it aligns with the cultural characteristics of the tribe. 

It's rare for people to show up to a new church for the first time because they saw a flyer or because the church was just there. Instead, guests typically visit a church for the first time because they were invited by someone who is already a member of the church. People talk about how much they've received from attending the church or temple and, subse-quently, encourage their friends and colleagues to attend.
Both religious texts and marketing jargon refer to these people as evangelists, bringers of good news. In the religious sense, the term
"evangelist" is used to describe someone who tries to persuade people to become Christians. In the marketing sense, "evangelists" are people who try to persuade others to try a product that they swear by. We also evangelize for our respective cultural characteristics -telling people to try this, look at something a particular way, or refrain from doing a certain thing based on what "people like us" do. When you preach the gospel to your congregation, you empower evangelists to convert the nonbelievers-the apathetic, the naysayers, and the incredulous.
As the gospel hymnal proclaims, "I once was blind, but now I see," and thus, these newly sighted people feel compelled to tell the good news wherever they go. They, too, preach the gospel on your behalf because they believe. This is the network effect of evangelism.

when you communicate with your people, don't lead with the benefits and features of your offerings. Instead, preach the gospel about your beliefs and the way you see the world. This will connect with people by activating the part of the brain that stirs up emotion and, ultimately, catalyzes behavior.
We've seen examples of gospels preached throughout this chapter like "Opt Outside," "Just Do It," and "Think Different.? These words should not be mistaken for mere taglines. Rather, they are articulations of belief.
They are the expression of the way these brands see the world, and they have a strong gravitational pull on people who see the world similarly.

This pull is so strong that it not only inspires these people to take action but also motivates them to encourage other people like them to take action also.

As you consider this, ask yourself, how would you communicate your company's or organization's worldview? How would you preach the gospel to your congregation? Don't focus on the words so much because that might seem like an intimidating creative exercise-you can save that for the speechwriters and advertisers. Instead, start with a statement of truth, as you did at the end of the previous chapter: "We believe [fill in the blank]." This is the soul.

Once you've communicated the soul, then end with the sale: "**We believe [fill in the blank], so we created [fill in the blank: product or orga-nization] to realize this belie**f" REI believes that a life outdoors is life well spent, so it closed on Black Friday to encourage people to opt for playing outside instead of shopping indoors. Nike believes that every human body is an athlete, so it creates products to help people realize their best athletic self-so people can just do it. Apple believes in challenging the status quo, so it challenged people to think different and consider going against the conventional norm. What do you believe? What is your company's worldview?

The tribe: a broad doorway to enter but a narrow path to belong. 

1. We are
2. We think
3. We agree
4. We say

What would get you dismissed from the tribe?

Codify the fan club: Beyhive, yunèverse

Beyoncé’s music was simply the cultural product that people used to communicate their shared worldview and engage in social discourse. Doing so helped them project their  identity that demarcate where they fit in the world. It is through this lens of cultural identity that we establish connections within the tribal networks that we choose to join and subsequently, act in concert with. 

Don’t look for fans, look for believers. Instead of trying to convince the nonbelievers, activists the collective of the willing, those who already believe. 

Instead of trying to create a community around you, try to find the people who already believe what you believe and facilitate the network that connects them. 

experiences help shape how we see the world, which ultimately informs how we behave in the world.

People don’t buy what you do. They buy why you do it. -Simon Sinek

speak the “what” but preach the “why”. 

Meaning

How it’s made and how it moves from cultural production to cultural consumption 

Meaning is embedded in products by way of four unique fashioning systems:

- Advertising
- News outlets
- Highly esteemed individuals
- Fringe societies

These are reworked into our identities through four unique ritualised practices:

- Possession
- Exchange
- Grooming
- Divergence

**Consult page 130 to break out the above categories** 

If you want to get people to move by leveraging the unparalleled influence of culture, it's not enough to just preach the gospel to the congregation; you must also understand how they make meaning.

A shirt is no longer just a shirt. A sneaker is no longer merely a shoe. A car becomes something more than just a vehicle to get me from here to there. Instead, they become a symbol of something far greater
Once again, I think it's helpful to think of this in religious terms. In religious texts, this process would be called consecration, when something that was once common becomes sacred or set apart. It might seem odd to think of a mass-produced product as something people might consider sacred. But according to neuroscientists, it's not a far-fetched idea. In 2011, researchers conducted a magnetic resonance imagining (MRI) study on the brains of Apple fans after they were presented with messaging from the brand. The researchers found that the Apple fans experienced stimulation in the same region of the brain as religious people when exposed to their respective artifacts. The same feelings, reactions, and excitement that are activated in the minds of religious practitioners during worship are conjured in the minds of zealots who subscribe to the cult of Apple when engaging with the brand. Brands can indeed be consecrated and elevated to totem status when meaning congruence is achieved. Plenty of our favorite, most beloved brands, like Apple, are.
The act of consecration illustrates just how powerful meaning making can be for humans and how important meaningful brands are to who we are--both individually and collectively. When it is done well, the meanings and imagery that we associate with brands become shared and salient in the minds of a community, so much so that the process creates a shorthand that gives the brand permission to exist beyond the products it traditionally makes. Try this old adage as a comparison: imagine if Nike were to start a chain of hotels. Can you envision what that hotel might look like? Most likely, yes. But if I told you that the Westin Hotel had decided to make a sneaker, it would be much harder to picture because, in our minds, the Westin is a hotel and nothing else. Its collective meaning stops there. Nike, on the other hand, means so much more. When you think of Nike, you envision rich imagery and relevant associations that extend beyond its prod-ucts. These memory structures are evoked because of the meaning congruence between the gospel Nike preaches and the meaning that people have ritualized into their own identity, which allows the brand to venture into any category it chooses so long as it is in line with how people perceive it. That's superpowerful.
But here's the trick, which you may have already noticed. Although brands and leaders have the ability to preach the gospel in hopes of infusing your product with meaning, they don't actually make mean-ing-people do. Marketing signals intended meaning through the fashioning systems available to us, but people do the meaning mak-ing. The philosopher Roland Barthes underscored this point by saying,
"The author has no sovereignty over his own words. It belongs to the reader who interprets them." While marketers own the brand mark, control how the brand expresses itself, and decide which products the company might offer, it's the people who decide what the brand expression means and whether it fits with their cultural identity. People are the sole meaning makers, and meaning congruence is achieved when the intended meaning of what is signaled is aligned with the meaning that people assign to it. That is to say, meaning is socially constructed, and therefore, it belongs to the people.
As an academic, I became fascinated with the concept of meaning making and its impact on consumption. During my doctoral studies at Temple University, I explored how brands and branded products spread within a community through social contagion- the effects of peer influ-ence-and collective meaning making. When social contagion occurs within a community, brands are not only adopted by the community but also normalized and elevated from utilitarian functions to identity markers.

"Do people like me do something like this?" This is the question we ask ourselves as we navigate our day-to-day lives. The theoretical framework for understanding how social structures-like norms and practices--are established as guidelines for social behavior is referred to as institutional theory. According to this theory, the process of legitimation is shaped by imitation. We observe others who we think are like us to decide what is acceptable behavior for us. The world-renowned scholar of social psychology and influence Robert Cialdini referred to this phenomenon as social proof, where we copy the actions of others to fit in. Social proof provides a signal of what is deemed acceptable behavior among our people, and, subsequently, we receive the behavior as acceptable and act in concert to promote social solidarity.
Legitimation is socially constructed and plays a critical role in the process of meaning making. Every time a community is introduced to something new (an exogenous shock to the system like a new product, new music, or any breaking news that comes through our news feeds and across our screens), members of the community collectively make sense of it (make meaning) and decide whether and how it will be integrated into their culture. Once your brand has been legitimated by the congregation, you're set!

The more the brand is worn or used by community members, the more credence the brand or branded product is given as it undergoes assessment of being deemed "good" and "in" by the community.
The fourth mechanism, reinforcing, illustrates that as people visibly present themselves with a particular brand or speak positively about it, they are essentially casting their vote about the evaluation and legitimation of the brand. The more community members wear the brand or talk about the brand in a positive light, the more the brand is perceived by other community members as "cool" and "acceptable" more broadly. As the saying goes, "Nothing draws a crowd like a crowd"
The reinforcing mechanism facilitates what is performed by the individual and observed by other community members, the result of which helps to drive the social coordination that is needed for social contagion to occur within a community. The reinforcing mechanism is heightened thanks to the prevalence of social network platforms-like Facebook, Instagram, and TikTok--that enable greater visibility of the cultural receipts that community members present when their identity projects are on display through the content they post online.
We will discuss this further in the next chapter.

Just as beauty lies in the eye of the beholder, meaning lies in the mind of the interpreter. 

We learn about the world (beliefs), who we are (identity), and how we fit in the world (ideology) through storytelling. Stories are how we teach morality (folklore) and help the interpellation of children so that they become citizens of good standing in society. As a child, I learned about my religion through stories like Daniel and the lion's den and the Exodus from Egypt. They were easily digestible, readily available for memory recall, and, consequently, frequently shared. It's no wonder Jesus spoke in parables because stories serve as an incredible vehicle that helps socialize cultural values and foster community cohesion.

The more we hear stories the more we believe them to be true. The repetition of the stories creates a sense of reality for us. As Daniel Kahneman puts it “a reliable way to make people elusive in falsehood is frequent repetition because familiarity is not easily distinguished from the truth.”

Not only does the repetition of stories establish what we consider to be true, it also influences our preference. The more we hear it, the more we like it because familiarity feels good.