# Oversubscribed

Author: Daniel Priestley
Publication Date: 2015
Year Read: 2024

The brain forms connections based on three key ingredients:

Time - If you spend a lot of time with people, they start to bond with you. In particular, research into bonding behaviour suggests that spending more than seven hours with someone moves you beyond the "acquaint-ance" category and towards being a "friend."

Interactions - Having frequent exchanges of communication builds connection. Anyone who had an international pen pal will tell you that you can build a bond based on nothing other than writing letters to one another. In a research paper called "Zero Moments of Truth," a Google thought leader discovered that when people had about 11 interactions with a brand, they were considerably more likely to buy from that brand.

Locations - Seeing people in different places is another way stronger bonds are built. People who see each other only at work are not as bonded as people who also see each other in social settings or at sporting events. The magic number is four locations according to research into trust building.

If we spent 7 hours together, had 11 interactions between us and met up in 4 separate locations theres little doubt we would feel a bond. It would seem like we are more friends than acquaintances.

This makes sense from an evolutionary perspective. Our ape-like ancestors had to learn who was a trustworthy member of the tribe and who was a potential threat. It stands to reason that if two homo sapiens have spent time and interacted in several places with each other they are part of the same tribe.
Therefore the key to carving out your own market is in the formula of 7-11-4. The more people you can clock up time, interactions and locations with, the more people will see you as different, unique and part of their tribe. Through this lens, a famous person is merely someone who has used media and technology to 7-11-4 people.

People who are star-struck by Oprah have probably watched more than seven hours of her shows, interacted with her more than 11 times and seen her in four separate locations (e,g. TV, magazines, social media and newspapers). P32/33

FOUR MARKET POSITIONS THAT GET OVERSUBSCRIBED

The way to being oversubscribed is to achieve an imbalance in which there are more buyers than sellers in your market.

There are four drivers of market imbalances where you'll often see more buyers than sellers:

- Innovation - You offer something new and shiny that no one else offers. There's only one seller (you) and a niche of new buyers who want it. There are therefore more buyers than sellers by virtue of the fact there's only one supplier and more people who want it.
- Relationships - You build such a powerful relationship with buyers that they ignore other sellers. There are more buyers than sellers because buyers aren't interested in other sellers.
- Convenience - You are answering the needs of the market wich the most frictionless expression of what they want. This is about being in the right place, at the right time, with something that meets consumers unmet desires. This creates more buyers than sellers because buyers are reluctant to invest time, money and energy finding alternatives.
- Price - This occurs when you're able to create an imbalance based on price. You've invested into an asset that creates an efficiency others don't have. Crucially, you're still able to offer your products at a price that is profitable but that price is lower than other suppliers can achieve. P43/44

The reason is because people don't buy what others want to sell; they buy what other people want to buy. We buy proper. ties that are in hot spots. We buy clothes that are in fashion. We engage consulting firms that other aspirational brands use. We invest in companies that other investors are throwing money at. Yet countless companies make the mistake of going to great lengths to show how badly they want to sell something. They set up stores everywhere; they mark their prices down; they scream into the streets that they have "cheap" products to sell.
Service providers take on clients without setting any boundaries. They answer calls late at night, get paid late and incur costs. If they don't answer the phone, their message apologises and promises a return call as soon as possible.
Everything about the typical service provider screams, "I will do anything for a sale."
But the more companies do that, the more they turn people off. The more a potential buyer sees you are desperate to sell something the more they wonder why you're so desperate.
Your goal is to place a high value on what you do, work with people who recognise value and exceed their expecta-tions. Set your boundaries, have your terms, protect your space so you can deliver something special.
The skill comes in making something available without forcing it on people - generating output without destroying the demand-and-supply tension. People want social proof; they want to see that others buy from you, others value you and others recommend you. The most powerful way to make something available is in a way that reaffirms the value not the availability of the product. P58/59

They understand that if you treat your clients as aspirational individuals, many more people will aspire to be like them too. Celebrate your clients. Make them the stars of your show. Get famous on their success stories. Take all that money you want to spend on getting a new client and spend it on celebrating your existing clients. Put them high on a pedestal for everyone to see. Rather than beating your drum about yourself, beat the drum for your clients. Help them create a huge success story and then showcase it. Treat your clients like celebrities and let them pull a crowd. In most industries, if you genuinely do focus on the success of your clients you will stand out like a beacon and become massively oversubscribed as a byproduct. Hold your clients up in the highest esteem. Rather than completing a transaction, then looking for the next buyer, take more time to care for the person who just bought from you. Take time to make sure that person feels good about his or her purchase and that he or she is given more than expected. Don't rush off; build the relationship. Whether you like it or not, every buyer is a brand ambassador who informs the market whom your product is built for. When people feel good about buying from you, they will tell people that they bought from you. When they tell people they bought from you, other people like them will want to buy from you too. When people want to buy from you, you're on your way to being oversubscribed. P60/61/62

Your philosophy is made up of your strongly held beliefs and opinions. I's your take on life and it doesn't need to appeal to everyone. Your philosophy is based on your vision for the future, your story about the past, your maxims and values that resonate most strongly with you.
If you were sitting by an open fire with a friend talking about life, the world, friendships, family and the hard lessons you've learned, out would come your philosophy. If you both shared openly what you believe, you'd end up building a stronger bond as friends.
People who only share the features, advantages and benefits of their products box themselves in. They become another vendor trying to sell a commodity. When you have the courage to share your philosophy you become like a champion of a cause or a leader of a movement. What's your philosophy? What are your strongly held beliefs about what you do? What do you stand for? What do you stand against? What is the change you want to see in the world? P69/70

You must give away information freely or cheaply and then charge for the implementation work. P87

Undisciplined innovation out of boredom is dangerous.
If ever you feel the restless urge to create something new, the first place to innovate is in the ecosystem that supports your winning formula. P95

 businesses must begin investing more money into your products and your customer service and less money into advertising and traditional forms of market-ing. Oversubscribed businesses spend money on their existing customers before they spend money on their prospective ones. It seems counterintuitive - but if you get it right, your existing customers go out and do your marketing for you. P113

Why do people pretend that they have no issues with capacity? Why pretend that you can serve everyone when you can't?
I's far better to figure out how many people you can properly serve and then be honest about that number. If your business can take good care of only 21 clients a year, then say so. If you're comfortable providing software to only 10,400 subscribers, then say so. If you're maxed out with
283 restaurant bookings a week, then be clear about it.
Knowing your real capacity is powerful. I's almost impossible to become oversubscribed if you don't know what your capacity is.
Every business has a capacity to deliver a remarkable product or service. Once you try to exceed that capacity, your standards across the board have to drop and people don't get the experience they thought they were going to get. Not just the new clients — all of them. They feel disappointed, and its a slippery slope from there. This business will suffer as people learn about your customers underwhelming experiences.
So let's take another look at your business's capacity co deliver. How many clients can you truly serve well? How many products can you really sell? How many customers can you genuinely make feel uplifted? P138

IT BEGINS WITH A HAPPY CUSTOMER
I want you to imagine your perfect client. This person is perfect in every way - enjoyable to work with, they pay on time, they tell their friends about you and they come back wanting more. You enjoy working with them and they think the world of you.

What is it about the person that makes them so perfect?

Let's go back to the time before this person became your client. What were they looking to achieve? What problem were they trying to solve? What was less than perfect in their world?

Every business exists to solve problems for its custom-ers. The reason your perfect clients love you is because you solve a high-value problem for them in a remarkable way.

You meet an unmet need, you scratch an itch, you leave them feeling an emotion they hadn't felt elsewhere.

Unless you can understand this unmet need and what the problem is that you solve for your perfect client you can never generate such a client.

So let's take a look at the problem you solve for people.

High-value products and services are linked to four underlying drivers:

- Save or make money
- Save time or eliminate wastage
- Bring increased emotional benefits
- Ease pain, suffering or negative emotions

P139

A customer buys something. A client keeps coming back. A customer results from a transaction whereas a client results from a relationship.
Your job is to create both. Your business will need to offer products and services at a lower price point so that people can try you out and you can see if they are right for you too. For example, your business might run a promotional event and 100 people buy a ticket for $40. These people are customers of your business because they bought something. P147

You might then decide that you'd be happy to work with 20 out of the 100 on an ongoing basis. Of these 20, you sign on 10 new clients who will buy from you regularly because you nurture the relationship.
You wouldn't have found those 10 clients if you hadn't generated 100 customers first. You need to generate plenty of customers who buy a "product-for-prospects" at a low-risk price point. You then need to discern who would be a great client for you long term.
A barbershop might have 1,000 customers a year who step in for a cut once or twice. They will also have a group of clients who get their hair cut at the same place every month.
The barbershop is wise to be able to know the difference between the two. They will also be wise to know how to turn good customers into raving fan clients.
There's nothing wrong with having a purely transactional interaction with people if the terms are clear.
They buy your product, it's great and they are happy cus-tomers. Ultimately though, the only way to sustain your business is if some of these happy customers become happy clients. P148

Oversubscribed businesses more often talk about something bigger than what they do. They talk about the lifestyle of their customers, they talk about philosophy, they talk about a big problem they want to solve or they talk about the transformation they want to see in the world.
You must look for the bigger game your business is playing for and beat the drum for it in your campaigns. It’s far more compelling for you and for your customers to get involved in a big game than simply focussing on the basic products and services you sell. P156/157

The best and longest-lasting campaigns centre on pur-pose. The reason you began your business or chose to work on the team you are part of isn't only about the money. You're doing what you do because you believe there's more to it than just the cash. If you can get other people to believe what you believe they will want to be part of what you do too. The key is to talk about something bigger than what you do. P158

People take time to warm up to a buying decision. They typically don't just hear about something new for sale and purchase it right away. They need time to learn, trust, explore and get ready to act. The build-up phase respects this about people and creates a journey of signalling to your market and collecting signals back from your market before you ask for any firm commitments. P163

Rather than asking people to buy, ask them to signal interest. Let them know that there will be a widget for sale soon and if they are interested in more information, can they please email a request or fill in an expression of interest form.
This is a much lower commitment for people. Rather than having to get their credit card out right there and then, all they have to do is fill in a form, click "like" or reply to an email. P166/167

You should have seven hours of digital content available. You should prepare at least 11 interactions across at least four social media channels. Articles, podcasts, videos, apps, questionnaires, reports, illustrations, books, case studies, events and even tweets - all of it counts towards hitting the mark. Get this right and your digital assets will go out and meet people wherever and whenever suits them. P177/178

As you approach your goal of having a lot of signalled interest in your offer, don't slow down. Don't stop running your ads, don't stop releasing your content, don't stop hosting regular events and promotions. Keep doing all the things that work to engage people in your campaign. P182

Transparency: Demand-and-supply tension peaks when it's transparent to potential buyers. When people can clearly see the ratio of people signalling interest relative to the available capacity is high, they feel a sense of urgency to act. Openly showing how many people have signalled or telling people these numbers is the crowning moment of an oversubscribed campaign. P190

my businesses we measure the rhythm using a dashboard called LAPS - leads, appointments, presentations and sales. Leads come in from people who have expressed interest in talking to us, appointments are when a dedicated time to talk has been set in the sales diary. Presentations are recorded when we successfully deliver our scripted sales script (sometimes people reschedule, don't show up or sales conversations go off-script), and sales are made when we take payment, sign terms and conditions and begin the onboarding process.
Different businesses have a different LAPS rhythm.
Some businesses make one sale for every ten leads they generate. Some businesses need to generate 100 leads to make one sale. 

Our LAPS scores over the last two years follow a predictable rhythm:
50 leads
10 appointments
8 presentations
2 sales

P207/208

WITH-OR-WITHOUT YOU ENERGY
Theres a big difference between being a salesperson in an oversubscribed business compared to a business that is struggling to meet its targets. The difference is what I call"with-or-without-you energy. This is a mystical sense of confidence someone has about them when they know they will meet their targets regardless of what any one individual decides - they seem to exude a sense that they will be fine with or without you. This energy is attractive. Humans are drawn towards people who aren't needy. They open up, they banter, they bond and they buy. Conversely, when someone is insecure and seems desperate to make a sale, it has the effect of making a prospect close down and withdraw from the conversation. P213/214

Only when you leave people uplifted will they talk about you in a positive way. If you leave them satisfied (sideways energy) they won't talk about you and all your efforts that went into satisfying them will have been for nothing. If you leave people on a downer, your business will suffer as people talk about the emotions that come from down energy. There's a simple principle when it comes to leaving people uplifted: do something great that people didn't see com-ing. If you buy a Porsche that is supposed to arrive in three days, you'll be pleased if it arrives on time and disappointed if it comes on day four. Strangely, if you're told that it won't be ready for six weeks and then they deliver it in four weeks, you'll be ecstatic. P220/221

It's far too easy to plough ahead into the next campaign without savouring your wins and learning from your failures.
Celebration and innovations are about publicly sharing the success of your campaigns, rewarding the people who made it all possible and looking for ways to make it better next time. There's always a temptation after a campaign to roll up your sleeves and do another one. It's quite addictive when you experience the buzz of a campaign and end up oversubscribed. Instead of rushing straight into the next campaign, you must complete this final phase. You need to hunt down the stories, capture the numbers, interrogate the data - then learn, share, congratulate and reward those involved. You need stories, numbers and insights. Celebration and innovation is about capturing them and using them powerfully. P231

Each watch these brothers make has a story too. Therés the range that was inspired by a B-2 Stealth Bomber pilot who wanted a completely black watch to match his completely black jet. There's the story of how they are the only company to test their watches for supersonic ejector seat deployment from a fighter plane. Theres the story about how every pilot who ejects (and survives) gets a special red bezel fitted to his or her watch. There are stories about adventurers who take Bremont watches to the Arctic, to the depths of the oceans, to the deserts, to the upper atmosphere and deep into remote jungles.
They have watches that you can buy only if you are "pre-authorised military personnel. Therés a timepiece that's hand-painted by Ronnie Wood of the Rolling Stones. A watch created for Scotland Yard detectives and another for a Hollywood movie about the Secret Service. There's the story they tell about how each glass face is coated with nine layers of anti-scratch protectant. How they have a special way of making their steel stronger than .. well, steel. P233

- Approved copy and images - Marketing people need to have access to an approved marketing message that is written down. They also need access to an image library that represents the brand. Great marketing people can turn this content and imagery into compelling materials but they need you and your company to provide the starting point.
- Approved content - The content could include articles, reports, case studies, ideas, recipes, stories, examples, and the like, This could take the form of audio, video or written content. Marketing people can then use this in a hundred different ways to help drive leads.
- Lead capture systems - Marketing people will need a system for capturing and storing the data of people who are responsive to the marketing materials. Regardless of whether you use an automated online or an old-school phone system, you need to know who's interested and where they came from.
- Measurement benchmarks - Marketing people need to know what an allowable cost per lead, allowable cost per sale and an allowable budget all are for testing ideas.
If they don't have these benchmarks, they will either become paralysed by fear or go rogue with overactivity. P266

- Prolific beats perfect - No company is perfect; everyone makes mistakes. Keep moving forward and keep making your business better. We don't need to be perfect; directionally accurate moves are better than procrastination.
- Innovation never ends - Top companies spend 5% to 15% of their revenues on research, training and devel-opment. Stagnant companies avoid innovation, training, development and research because of what they perceive it costs. You invest in innovation and it doesn't stop. P276