# Primal Branding

Author: Patrick Hanlon
Publication Date: 2006
Year Read: 2025

Primal branding is about delivering the primal code. It is a construct of seven assets that help manage the intangibles of your brand. Those seven assets are: "the creation story"; "the creed"; "the icons"; "the rituals"; "the pagans"; "the sacred words"; and "the leader." Together, these pieces of primal code construct a belief system. P6

Once you look at a brand as a belief system, it automatically gains all the advantages that enterprise strives for: trust, vibrancy, relevance, a sense of values, community, leadership, vision, empathy, commitment, and more. With the seven pieces of primal code in place you have created a belief system and products and services that people can believe in. P7

Believing is belonging. When you are able to create brands that people believe in, you also create groups of people who feel that they belong. This sense of community is at the center of psychologist Abraham Maslow's famous hierarchy of human needs. Whether you belong to a Masai tribe or you're a New Yorker, whether you're a baseball nut, a computer geek, a shopaholic, a marathon runner, a foodie, tekkie, biker, trekker, or triathelete, it is an essential human truth that we all want to belong to something that is larger than ourselves.
That community can surround a product or service, a personality, a social or political cause, or a civic community. P7

Part of the reason that companies like Diageo, Altria, AOL Time Warner, and others do not resonate is that, while we can comprehend the marketplace advantages, they have never adequately explained why they exist. Because we do not understand, those companies lack meaning. One conglomerate company that tried to resonate and failed a decade ago was Beatrice Foods. Their failure was not because they tried, but because they did not know how to use the elements of the primal code, beginning with a creation story. Sticking to traditional advertising and spending millions of advertising dollars propelling its product line and logo sting, the viewer still had no clear idea of Beatrice or its purpose. More important, we did not care. P19

What you believe in, what you want others to believe about you, what the mission is, are not easy statements to make. Imagine the United States of America brand without its Declaration of Independence, its Bill of Rights, or the Pledge of Allegiance. Google provides unbiased, accurate, and free information to the public. The world ecology movement's creed is to save the planet (and ourselves). P20

Icons are quick concentrations of meaning that cause your brand identity and brand values to spontaneously resonate. The Nike swoosh. The Apple start-up "bong." The sound of the Pentium gliss. The smell of Cinnabons, the American flag, the Coke bottle, the Absolut bottle, the Beatles's mop hair, the rock group Kiss's make-up, the Budweiser Clyesdales, the Tide package, the national anthem. Whether the icons are visual, sound bites, smell, or some other form, they are sensory imprints that instantly summon the brand essence. And we recognize these icons early on. When my daughter Devin was just eighteen months old, she would point out the McDonald's arches from her infant seat. P26

People in the public eye can also become icons for their brand. Richard Branson has become synonymous with everything Virgin. Mick Jagger and Keith Richards are icons for the Rolling Stones. Michael Eisner, Jack Welch, Steve Jobs, Bill Gates, and others have also become icons for the brands they for. P26

There's packaging on people, too. Wigs as seen on British lords are icons of Georgian England (and British courts). Neck collars as seen in portraits of Queen Elizabeth and Sir Walter Raleigh are icons of another era. More recently, the Armani suit is iconic of a certain lifestyle, as are mod, goth, surfer, and skater clothing styles. Tattoos are the icons of a racy subculture. Cowboy hats are icons of the American West and country western music. Lederhosen is an icon of the European Alps (and slapstick humor). And the wedding dress is an icon of the marriage ceremony. P32/33

"The human brain has evolved to look for meaning in a sequence of events; that's what meaning is," reveals Althsul. "Our minds have evolved to understand complex events.
The search for meaning is a more powerful one than product attributes can display. What people are asking when they ask the brand question is, Who cares? Why does it have meaning in my life? How does it connect with how I see myself in my world? It may be an empty promise, but it's the juice." P48

In order to create something that people believe in and want to belong to, all elements of the primal code must be active.
It is not enough to create a flag. You must have a nation willing to follow it. P52

> Rituals are the meaningful repeated points of contact between you and your guest, customer, client, or target mar-ket. The weekly trip to the grocery store. Back-to-school shopping. Christmas shopping. Shopping for Valentine's Day or buying groceries for the Thanksgiving feast are rituals in themselves. These interactions with the customer can be flat experiences, or they can serve as enriching touch points that excite consumers and intensify the brand experience. P68
> 

order to have the yin of believers you must also have the yang of nonbelievers. The pagans. The heathens and idolaters. Part of saying who you are and what you stand for is also declaring who you are not and what you don't stand for. The contrasting counterparts of Democrats are Republicans. There are hawks and doves. Pro-life and pro-choice. DOS/Java. National Rifle Association/the Brady Campaign. Internet/bricks and mortar. Cola/un-cola. Organic/processed Gas guzzlers/tree huggers. New York/L.A. The sacred and the profane. P70

All belief systems come with a set of specialized words that must be learned before people can belong. If you're a marathon runner you understand what it means to "hit the wall." If you are a computer user you understand what it means to "log on," what a "virus" is, and what it means to "crash." If you go to Starbucks you understand the difference between a "tall" and a "grande." To follow the world of Walt Disney you learned the songs and memorized names like Minnie Mouse, Goofy, Pluto, and Donald Duck. Perhaps you even taught yourself to speak like Donald. P72

"The thing about language," says Abley, "is that there's always going to be a need for groups to identify themselves and set themselves apart somehow. We live in a society which is incredibly complex and the only way to deal with that is to feel a part of a subgroup or to make ourselves an extended family generally, and so one of the really good ways to do that is to baffle outsiders.” P74/75

At the end of the day we all want to feel that we are a part of something larger than ourselves. As Sue Ellen Cooper, founder of the Red Hat Society, says, "It's much more fun to be part of something big." All belief systems have people who believe, advocates who feel that the brand offers a place where they can belong. That sense of belonging manifests itself in several ways. First, consumers invest themselves in your brand by purchasing products or services because they believe in them. Second, they are willing to help convince others to belong (as we know, this word of mouth is one of the oldest and best forms of advertising). Finally, advocates believe so strongly in the brand that they fiercely defend it against rivals. Try to tell a Mac user that they have to trade it for a PC. Tell a Ford truck owner that he has to drive a Chevy. And we all remember what happened when Coke tried to change their formula. P87

Coffee is highly ritualized to begin with, and at Starbucks the caffeinated ritual of affordable luxury is intensified: We stand in line to order our coffee, we stand in another line to get our latte, and then we stand again at the minibar to put in our Nutrasweet and grab a napkin.
Pagans? Instant Maxwell House and people who drink Coke for breakfast (or, if you're under thirty, Mountain Dew). Anyone who wants to order at Starbucks first had to learn the sacred words. Whether you're ordering a "venti" coffee, or an "iced grande decaf nonfat latte" you know that it only seems that you're paying by the syllable. P99/100

Primal branding is a simple way to decode the intangible power behind brands. In workshops called Primal Digs, we work together with companies to help them engineer and reverse engineer their brands and their company culture.
The primal code is a language, like genetic code or computer code. We help companies learn the vernacular of primal branding, by first explaining the seven pieces of code. Then they explore which pieces already exist in their company and brand(s), and which pieces are absent or have grown stale and tired. Too often, pieces of code are missing. People have forgotten or discarded their creation story (for example, when Smirnoff recently went back and discovered their ori-gins, it gave them incentive to go on to become the world's best-selling vodka). Some business people have not identified or do not understand the significance of their rituals. Even consumer electronics companies like Samsung and Best Buy, for example, understand today that how people relate to their products during the shopping rite is not just a feature-driven experience. P210

Sometimes when I explain primal branding, executives nod their heads and say, "Oh sure, we have every one of those things." Yet if you asked the ordinary consumer, they would reply they don't feel any vibrancy or connection to that brand. Why? The usual reason is that they really don't have all of the pieces of code. Or managers haven't communicated the pieces of code to the public as well as they think. This is typical brand boosterism, when brand leaders think consumers care as much about their brands as they do. The first step in primal branding is to determine where your brand exists in the minds of customers. Many companies already have customer information they can sort to determine how their brand aligns with the primal code and consumers. A brand audit can help you define which pieces of code you need to develop or focus on. You can do this by looking at each piece of code to see how it relates to your company, personality, product, or industry. P214/215

How did your company or idea start? Who started it?
Did it start because someone was frustrated, because the marketplace was changing, because someone had a dream?
Where did it start—was it an idea two guys came up with on an airplane, did someone see a crack in the marketplace, did someone have an insight while on vacation? These are actual examples of inspiration. Whether the idea started in a hotel room, a garage, or borrowed space, it is important back story.
Often, the story of how the company started is so well known to old hands at the company that they assume everyone is aware of it and they neglect to inform new employees, new managers, new hires of every stripe. P216

The creed is the second piece of code. Many companies have invested hundreds of man and woman hours unraveling the company mission and distilling their products and services, hopes and dreams into a succinct statement. Sometimes that statement can become the creed. Often, however, the mission statement satisfies other internal objectives. The creed should answer the question, Why do we belong in people's lives? Why do we come to work in the morning? Why should people care? The answer might be, To invent. To dis-cover. To teach. To save. To discuss. To enlighten. What does your company celebrate? Is it precision quality? Breakthrough innovation? Best-of-class customer service? Incredible performance? Economics? P218

The expression of what your product or service is about becomes concentrated and instantly communicated in your icons. The question people often have is, How can I tell what my icons are? As discussed elsewhere in this book, icons can be as simple as your company logo or as discreet as senses like taste or smell. Icons can be the product itself. Ask yourself, What are the Wham! moments when the senses are slammed by a concentration of meaning instantly identified with your brand? How does your brand make an impression? Is it the product? The experience? A look? A taste? A smell? What is the first impression? What is the last impression? Vibrant brands have many icons that propel the brand. Starbucks, for example, has their iconic mermaid logo. But they also have that white cup that can be spotted from across the street, the corrugated paper comfort ring, the green aprons, barrista counter, and wood and hued environments, all icons of the Starbucks experience. P220/221

The longer a brand has been in existence, the more layered the icons become. For example, there is not just one icon for democracy United States-style. The icons run deep: the Stars and Stripes, Mount Rushmore, the Washington Monu-ment, the voting booth, the Lincoln Memorial, the United States Capitol building, the Statue of Liberty, and more. For over two hundred years the same accumulation has occurred for the rituals, sacred words, leaders, and other pieces of code that create the brand called "U.S.A.” P222

People are often as confused about what constitutes a ritual as they are about icons. I have outlined many examples of rituals throughout this book. As a general guide, rituals are actions that involve how the product is used, how the service is engaged, where and how the consumer goes to shop, and how the product is maintained, returned, renewed, down-loaded, or updated. One way of discerning the rituals involved with your product, service, person, or civic community is to think through how people become involved with your brand. Draw a timeline and write down the moment when people are first introduced to your brand (whether through word of mouth, a salesperson, or advertising), then the string of ritual events that follow: pulling into the store's parking lot, entering the store threshold, encountering the greeter, the ritual of walking through the aisles, what happens at checkout, then getting back in the car again. P223

As mentioned elsewhere, sales calls and telephone calls are also a ritual. If you want to hear a terrific phone experi-ence, call Nike headquarters. If you want a poor experience, call your phone company or your bank. As an exercise, describe how you would make those rituals easier, more per-sonal, and more rewarding. For example, do we really need to push our way through five layers of buttons only to have to repeat all of that same information again when we finally reach a human being?
Rituals can be positive or negative reinforcements of the brand. It's your job to determine which. P224/225

The pagans, or nonbelievers, are usually the easiest to iden-tify. They are most often your competition, another way of working (think Mac versus PC), other ways of thinking ("supply and demand" versus "on-demand"). Who are you not? What are you trying to avoid? Who are you up against?
While it is easy to set yourself up against the competitors that help differentiate you outside the company, it is more diffi-cult-and painful—to identify the pagans within your orga-nization. One software company was faced with people who couldn't attend to clients' software questions in a timely manner, resulting in lots of frustrated customers. In a primal session one of the people responsible for the slow service suddenly blurted out, "We're our own pagans." P225

It seems a function of human nature to create special words around the things we value. Whether those things are career, family, or products and services, they resonate more vibrantly when given their own vocabulary. What are the words that define your company or yourself? What words resonate internally or with consumers? What words help define who you are or what you want to become? For fifty years a mantra originally written for Cadillac in the 1930s-
"On Excellence" —has been passed on to hundreds of compa-nies. Occupations have their own terms of art. Lovers, families, and friends have their own special words, phrases, jokes that help to bind them together. Sacred words can also originate from a visionary leader.
Sometimes sacred words just happen. No one could have predicted the success of Verizon's "Can you hear me now?" query. Or Budweiser's old "Wassup?" campaign. The success of both were functions of execution, performance, and excellent luck. P226

Brands are ideologies with their own universe of truths, iconography, history, heroes, and demons. The power of a belief system is that it inherently contains relevance, vision, trust, empathy, leadership, vibrancy, resonance, and commitment, the very attributes companies spend millions of dollars each year trying to obtain.
Between exemplary examples like Nike and also-ran products like Lestoil lay thousands of companies in between.
These are brands that have recognizable icons, fulfilling rituals, and enriched creation stories, but that lack other parts of the primal construct and are vulnerable to attack from more compelling brands. P233

succinctly evidenced by their well-orchestrated experience.)
Creating a world of believers means creating a group of people who feel they belong to your ideals and want to convince others of your cause. People who wear Nikes instead of Adidas, drink Starbucks rather than Maxwell House, prefer Disney World over Universal and California wine over French will advocate their causes without blinking. Recall your first trip to Starbucks, your first trip to the grocery store or school in a new area where you relocated. Odds are, it was recommended to you by someone else. Advocates will tell you the why, what, who, and where without even being asked. This is what is commonly known as "word of mouth," the most potent and sought after form of delivering a brand message. The third-party endorsement of people who already belong to your brand, your belief, your cause is the strongest argument for persuading others. Their anecdotal personal histories persuade better than the millions of dollars funnelled into promotional partnerships, Web sites, magazine campaigns, out-of-home, radio advertising, stunts, and other devices designed to stun, divert, bushwhack, and beguile us on the sponsor's behalf. P236

You don't ride a bike forty miles an hour down a steep dirt road because you got that bike for fifty dollars less than the guy riding behind you. You ride that bike for self-fulfillment, for the adrenalin rush, because the fat guy living next door to you can't or won't or is afraid to; you ride for affirmation, to defy death; you ride to scare your mother; you ride for a sense of love or abandonment or companionship; you ride because you need the endorphins; you ride because you are a screaming kamikaze who needs to feel the rattle of the road in your bones in order to feel like your life has meaning and substance and emotions that can't be expressed sitting behind a desk or basking in the communal fire of prime-time television. And sometimes you just ride the bike to get exercise. P236

Think of things that mean something to you. They all come from someplace ("creation story"). They stand for something ("creed"). They are symbolized by a sign, a sound, a smell ("icon"). You do certain specified things regarding them ("rituals"). Certain words evoke that experience ("sacred words"). You contrast that experience against other experiences ("pagans"). They have an individual, whether real or fictional, who is behind the whole thing ("leader"). It's all about creating a sense of meaning. The resonance inherent in a brand subsumes the competition. When people believe in and belong to a brand experience it's no longer about the task, it's about the experience. P236/237

when people believe in something, they seek out others who believe in the same thing. These people can belong to a group of people who buy the same brand of coffee each morning or put on the same kind of shoes. They can be people who drive the same kind of car to work in the morn-ing, or work in the same company, or live in the same city.
They can be people who vote for the same political party, or who attend the same after-hours bullshit session, or watch the same sports events, or like the same music group, or play the same action game on the Internet. They call themselves enthusiasts, derived from the Greek word enthusiasmos, a state likened to being "filled with the gods." They call themselves fans, the short form for fanatics. They can be baseball nuts or skateboard freaks. Their most curious aspect is their extremism, their zeal. And it doesn't much matter if they are crazy about the coffee they drink or wild about their favorite car or human rights or saving the world. These people are committed. P240

Don’t just build a church; create a religion. -Maureen White. P243