# Selfie

Author: Will Storr
Publication Date: 2017
Year Read: 2024

there's self and then there's culture. Two separate things. It's the self that wants to become perfect, and it's our culture that tells it what 'perfect' actually is. P20

Selfless acts are most often made on behalf of our people. P37

The celebrated mythologist Joseph Campbell explained this principle well: 'Whether you call someone a hero or a monster is all relative to where the focus of your consciousness may be. A German [fighting in WWII] is as much a hero as the American who was sent over there to kill him.’ P37

'The brains we have and the psychology those brains produce is important,' he told me, but it doesn't explain many of the things we'd like to explain, whereas culture and society do.' To what extent, then, are we the culture we're born into? 'In one sense, I'd say culture is about go per cent of what we are.’ P55

So the brain is a storyteller and it's also a hero-maker - and the hero that it makes is you. But the hero it makes and the plot it shapes your life around are not created in a void. The brain is a plagiarist, stealing ideas from the stories that surround it, then incorporating them into its self. Like John Pridmore and the ancient biblical tales he adopted, we absorb the stories that flow around our culture and use them to make sense of our past, our future, and to help us figure out who we are and who we want to be. We use them to construct our 'narrative identity'. P66

The storyteller inside us, then, is heavily influenced by the culture it's immersed in. From the fairy tales we hear as chil-dren, to films and works of literature, to the documentaries and news stories that narrativize the world more directly, to ancient parables in holy books, stories work as both entertainment and a kind of shopping mall of the self. 'Culture provides each person with an extensive menu of stories about how to live,' writes McAdams, 'and each of us chooses from the menu.' We build our sense of who we are by 'appropriating stories from culture'. Turning our lives into myth, he writes, 'is what adulthood is all about'. Our story gives our life meaning and purpose. It distracts us from the chaos and hopelessness and dread of the truth. P67

For the descendants of Confucius, reality is not a collection of individual objects but a field of interconnected forces. This means that East Asians tend to be more aware of what's happening in their environment: they'll see the whole picture, not merely its subject. They'll also understand that behaviour can be caused by the forces of the situation one finds oneself in, whereas an Aristotelian thinker, focused on individual objects and the powers they possess, is more likely to assume that a person acts as they do because they willed it. And so it's been found, in study after study. P72

So far, the researchers who study the 'geography of thought have revealed the extent to which where we are shapes who we are. The sort of person we become depends, to a great extent, on who we need to be in our particular environment. But that's not to say that individual men and women don't have the power to change us too. To argue this would be to deny the effect that Jesus, Aristotle, Confucius and all the other remarkable cultural leaders we're to meet on this journey have had on us. The fact is that when we're working out who we need to be in order to get along and get ahead, we're not just taking our information from stories. Being tribal animals, we're also constantly scanning our environment for people who seem to have, in some way, mastered the secrets of a successful life. The ideal self we're looking for doesn't only exist in fiction and gossip, it's also right there in front of us. And these people can be a powerful source of influence. The psychologist Professor Joseph Henrich writes that the 'cultural learning' that comes from those around us reaches directly into our brains and changes the neurological values we place on things and people, and in doing so, it also sets the standards by which we judge our-selves. P94

Our brains identify these leaders by being alert to various
'cues' that they, and the people around them, display. A basic cue we look for is 'self-similarity, for the straightforward reason that we're more likely to learn salient things by deciding to follow people who are like us in some fundamental way. (Our instinct to be drawn to and mimic those who are similar to ourselves is, sadly, yet another way that we're automatically tribal.) Another cue is age, which is especially important for children. Physical dominance is a cue that can be traced back to our primal ancestors and was, of course, John Pridmore's favoured method of exerting influence. But we also hunt for two more mercurial qualities that do much to explain not only the way in which individuals end up having outsized effects on their culture, but the often barmy world of celebrity we inhabit today. These cues are successful and prestige. P94/95

the 'Paris Hilton effect'. Because we're wired to direct our attention towards the people who are already the subject of attention, we'll sometimes be drawn to people in the media without really knowing why. But our being drawn to them makes the media focus on them even more. We then attend to them more, then the media attends to them more, and then there's a runaway effect, a feedback loop, in which the status of an essentially nondescript person becomes madly amplified.
So we copy people. We're helplessly drawn to them. We identify the ones who seem to know best how to get along and get ahead, we watch them, we listen to them, we open our selves to their influence. And then we'll often internalize the things they've taught us. They have become absorbed into our model of the perfect self. They are now part of us. And, so, culture spreads. P97

'At its very simplest, a self is a way that we can make sense of the things that happen to us,' he told me, leaning back in his chair with his legs crossed out in front of him. 'You need to have a sense of self in order to organize your life events into a meaningful story.' The notion that you have a soul, he explained, is an illusion. We feel as if we have a magical centre, a special core in which our moment-by-moment life is experienced. But there is no centre. There is no core. There is no soul. We experience our thoughts as if we're somehow listening to them, but as the philosopher Julian Baggini has observed, our minds are just one perception or thought after another, one piled on another. You, the person, is not separate from these thoughts.’ P142

'I am not what I think I am and I am not what you think I am; 1 am what I think that you think I am.' The illusion is thought to take form at around the age of two. 'That's when you start to have autobiographical memories,' he told me. Then, in most cases, at around two to three years of age, children start interacting with other children, competing with them and joining groups. To participate usefully in a social arrangement, you have to have a sense of who you are, you have to have a sense of identity, and that sense of identity is a self. That must be constructed by the contextual information - Who am I? Which groups do I belong to? - as well as the biological ones - Am I a boy or a girl? Am I black or white? - or whatever. You then merge these and form in-groups. You start to develop prejudices and biases. You become pre-occupied with what others think about you. Your sense of self worth is a reflection of what you think other people think about you. As you spend more and more time with other children, you start to develop hierarchies.’ P143

With these hierarchies comes our obsessional concern with status. 'We constantly seek validation. Why do we buy the fast cars? Why do we own the big yachts? Why do we need all these things that we don't really need? It's because we're signalling to others our self-status. If others believe we're fancy and great, our looking-glass self interprets that as evidence that we are fancy and great. We're self-conscious. We use clues from out there to tell us who we are in here. P143

As we travel through our days and lives, then, we're being continually changed by the situations we're in and the personalities that orbit us. The people around us create a kind of psychic mould that we expand into. This notion that we have a coherent self with integrity is slightly undermined by the fact that under different circumstances in different events we behave in totally different ways,' Bruce told me. These different selves reflect the fact that these are different social environments that we're occupying. P145

What all this work suggests is that a foundational idea of the Humanistic Psychologists is simply wrong - there is no authentic core to us, no essential, happy and perfect version of the self that can be exposed by stripping back the repressing expectations of society. In fact, the self is modular. We're made up of many competing selves, all of which are equally 'us', and which fight for dominance. Different versions of us emerge depending on where we are, what we're doing, who we're with and how aroused we happen to be. Our sense of who we actu ally are turns out to be critically dependent on what we believe others think of us. This brings to mind what Rory at the Suicide Lab told me about social perfectionism: 'It's nothing to do with What people actually think of you. It's what you think other people expect. The idea of the Looking-Glass Self exposes the social perfectionist in every one of us. We all judge ourselves by looking into the eyes of other people and imagining what they're thinking. P147

Adolescence is the break between the delusions of childhood and the delusions of adulthood, a time when the projects of one phase of life have broken down and the next have yet to emerge. And in that gap we glimpse the horrors that our storytelling brains work so hard to keep from us. I wish my storytelling brain worked better. I want some more of that delusion. P155

Today's young people have grown up in an era in which the markets have been freed to rule, and free markets favour the selfstarting business-person who relies on their own hard work and guile for survival. This generation have internalized the neoliberal economy. It's become a chief characteristic of who they are and who they want to be. 'We live in a time where market rhetoric, for better or for worse, and probably more for worse, has become almost pop cultural, the anthropologist Professor Alice Marwick told me. 'People are interested in entrepreneurship as a general social value. They're admiring celebrities for their hustle, avidly following things like which album or movie makes the most money or who's the most highly paid. There's a sense you go after corporate money, and that way you're independent and no one can tell you anything.
But what that really means is we're allowing the norms and values of corporations to dictate how we behave in our daily lives.'
In the age of perfectionism we're more likely to simply accept we shouldn't rely on the collective organism, whether it be government or corporation, to take responsibility for us.
We've really moved away from companies taking responsibility for training employees and keeping them for years and years; she said. 'We reward this almost constant stream of freelancers, where you're only at a company for a year or two and you're responsible for keeping your skill set up to date and if you don't do that, and you can't get a job, that's your fault. It's not the slat's fault for not taking care of its citizens, it's your fault for not keeping up with what's expected of you. I think people have really bought into this idea. P261

wasn't about being up on the economic theory or parsing the detail of campaign speeches or pondering the puzzle of the poor voting for a man who'd likely remove even more of their protections. The brain, after all, isn't especially interested in facts and data. We live our lives in story mode. Our minds make sense of the world using simplistic observations of cause and effect. They confabulate, weaving a useful, makes-sense narrative out of what they're feeling and seeing that casts their owners in a heroic light. As well as this, they're often tribal, making automatic allies of those who look and think like them, and enemies of those who don't. P278

Communication told me that the cycle of constantly needing it is. 'What's dangerous about getting accustomed to constant social feedback and constantly being told you're pretty is that when it gets cut off, you start to feel bad about yourself. You need that hit.' Not only does the fact that our mobile phones are always with us exacerbate this problem, so does the structure of social media platforms that place us on the same stream, and afford us the same space, as world-famous celebrities. It invites us to feel a kind of equivalence with them and to compare ourselves to them. What's more, because the new famous are partly comprised of reality TV and social media stars, they seem much more like us than the old-fashioned species. 'For a long time, Hollywood starlets were elevated to the level of untouchable,' Fox told me. 'We always knew these were people who were genetically gifted and more talented than we are. But now anyone can be a star and that makes everyone thirsty. P296/297

It's on the internet, in particular, that the beliefs of others are policed, their heresies loudly punished. It occurred to me that this might be the next irresistible step on the road we've taken: if we are all gods, then our feelings are sacred, and if our feelings are sacred, the people who hurt them must be sinners.
It felt as if, at the heart of all this, there was something inherently narcissistic - that our perspective is so precious we feel justified in silencing or punishing those who don't share it. P301

One remarkable feature of this new discord is the language students are using to denote injury. They speak of challenges to their points of view as acts of 'violence' or 'abuse' which leave them 'unsafe and 'traumatized'. It's as if their inner self, their 'soul', is so precious as to be sacrosanct. Also notable is the me-focused direction of much of their political activity. Whereas older generations protested in empathy with distant peoples - in apartheid South Africa, in Vietnam, in Biafra and in solidarity with those in Latin America or the Caribbean who were suffering as a result of US foreign policy - today's privileged, angry students seem far more preoccupied with changing the world for themselves and those near them. P302

Western culture prefers us not to believe we're defined or limited. It wants us to buy the fiction that the self is open, free, nothing but pure, bright pos-sibility; that we're all born with the same suite of potential abilities, as neural 'blank slates', as if all human brains come off the production line at Foxconn. This seduces us into accepting the cultural lie that says we can do anything we set our minds to, that we can be whoever we want to be. This false idea is of immense value to our neoliberal economy. The game it compels us to play can best be justified morally if all the contestants start out with an equal shot at winning. Moreover, if we believe we're all the same, this legitimizes calls for deregulated corporations and smaller government: it means that the men and women who lose simply didn't want it badly enough, that they just didn't believe - in which case, why should anyone else catch their fall? P329

Individualsm makes us a bla exits, that be For us, blame is an obict in space, a thing that exists one belongs to someone.
When e decide that it's ours, or somebody else's, we act in tenerance of the impossie addicts, the ature of why anybody behaves as they do. Of the addicts, the homeless, the violent, the obese, of those whose circumstances lead them into the utter darkness of prison, we're quick to condemn and slow to forgive. Ifa thing is what it is, then the thing you are, when you
fail, is bad.
It's easy to see why we might be unconsciously drawn to this idea. It's been in the air since at least 500 BC, when the Greeks formed the individualist view of the perfectible self that still entrances us today. Bewitched by our culture, we expect others to be rational and always in control of their behaviour.
We respond with disbelief and outrage when they disappoint.
But people aren't what we think they are. We're not all constructed from the same precision-tooled machine parts. We haven't all been equally, perfectly designed to face the challenges of our environment. We're lumps of biology, mashed and pounded into shape by mostly chance events. Our 'human potential is limited.
But this isn't the model of self that our culture keeps showing us. Instead, we're presented with an individual who has total free will and an ability to become whoever they choose.
And who they usually choose to be is an extraverted, slim, indi-vidualistic, optimistic, hard-working, popular, socially aware yet high-self-esteeming individual with entrepreneurial guile - all characteristics Ayn Rand would've recognized as heroic.
Because they're Greek, these cultural heroes will be beautiful both inside and out, and moving in the direction of perfection.
Because they're Christian, they'll have clean and goodly interior selves. Because they're humanistic, they'll be authentic and.
'real' and take responsibility for everything that happens to them. Because they're neoliberal, they'll be self sufficient and successful and following their dreams with a ferocious hunger. P330

Daniel Nettle writes that extraverts are 'highly active people who can lay their hands on vast stores of energy in pursuit of goals, are
'prepared to work very hard in pursuit of fame or money' and enjoy 'gaining status, receiving social attention'. He could be describing an ideal of self from Ancient Greece or a neoliberal hero.
As we've learned, it's not a coincidence that this model of ideal self also happens to be the one best equipped to get along and get ahead in the age of perfectionism - this era of heightened individualism, of financial crisis, of rising inequality, of personal debt, of small state, of deregulation, of austerity, of gig economy, of zero-hours contracts, of perfection-demanding gender ideals, of declining wages, of unrealistic body-image goals, of social media with its perfectionist presentation and its tribal outrage and demands for public punishment. These are the kinds of people who'll be more likely to win at the game that has been made of our world, the kinds who'll find a place in the boardroom or found billion-dollar hedge funds or startups - and then become powerful consumers, feeding back into the machine. This is who our modern tribal environment wants us to be. P331

Stopping the war of perfection that's happening in your head is just the first step. Once you've quit trying to be who you're not, you can make an assessment of the things you're doing with your life. Professor Little, in his study of 'personal projects', argues that it's crucial to understand our limitations so that we can pursue goals that recognize them. 'We need to invest in those projects that bring meaning to us but which are achievable,' he told me. 'And if they're not achievable, then you don't just give up and say, "Life's wretched," you think of other ways of having a meaningful life. Change your goals.
What he's describing is a way of changing how we feel without having to change who we are. This is the way I've come to think of it: put a lizard on an iceberg and it's miserable. Now release it into the Sahara. The core of who that lizard is hasn't altered in the slightest and yet it's become happy. Its experience of life, but not its self, has transformed. If we want to inch towards happiness, then, we should stop trying to change ourselves and start trying to change our environment - the things we're doing with our lives, the people we're sharing it with, the goals we have. We should find projects to pursue which are not only meaningful to us, but over which we have efficacy. It doesn't have to be our job, it doesn't have to be something grandiosely altruistic, it just has to be us. P333