# Society of The Spectacle

Author: Guy Debord
Publication Date: 1967
Year Read: 2024

THE IMAGES detached from every aspect of life merge into a common stream in which the unity of that life can no longer be recovered. Fragmented views of reality regroup themselves into a new unity as a separate pseudo-world that can only be looked at. The specialization of images of the world evolves into a world of autonomised images where even the deceivers are deceived. The spectacle is a concrete inversion of life, an autonomous movement of the nonliving. P7

THE SPECTACLE is not a collection of images; it’s is a social relation between people that is mediated by images. P7

 THE SOCIETY based on modern industry is not accidentally or superficially spectacular, it is fundamentally spectaclist. In the spectacle - the visual reflection of the ruling economic order - goals are nothing, development is everything. The spectacle aims at nothing other than itself. P10

THE SPECTACLE is able to subject human being to itself because the economy has already totally subjugated them. It is nothing other than the economy developing for itself. It is at once a faithful reflection of the production of things and a distorting objectification of the producers. P10

THE FIRST stage of the economy's domination of social life brought about an evident degradation of being into having - human fulfilment was no longer equated with what one was, but with what one possessed. The present stage, in which social life has become completely dominated by the accumulated productions of the economy, is bringing about a general shift from having to appearing - all "having" must now derive its immediate prestige and its ultimate purpose from appear-ances. At the same time all individual reality has become so-cial, in the sense that it is shaped by social forces and is directly dependent on them. Individual reality is allowed to appear only if it is not actually real. P10/11

WHEN THE real world is transformed into mere images, mere images become real beings - dynamic figments that provide the direct motivations for a hypnotic behaviour.
Since the spectacle's job is to use various specialised mediations in order to show us a world that can no longer be directly grasped, it naturally elevates the sense of sight to the special pre-eminence once occupied by touch: the most abstract and easily deceived sense is the most readily adaptable to the generalised abstraction of present-day society. But the spectacle is not merely a matter of images, nor even of images plus sounds. It is whatever escapes people's activity, whatever eludes their practical reconsideration and correction. It is the opposite of dialogue. Wherever representation becomes independent, the spectacle regenerates itself. P11

PHILOSOPHY - the power of separate thought and the thought of separate power - was never by itself able to supersede theology. The spectacle is the material reconstruction of the religious illusion. Spectacular technology has not dispersed the religious mists into which human beings had projected their own alienated powers, it has merely brought those mists down to earth, to the point that even the most mundane aspects of life have become impenetrable and un-breathable. The illusory paradise that represented a total denial of earthly life is no longer projected into the heavens, it is embedded in earthly life itself. The spectacle is the technological version of the exiling of human powers into a "world beyond"; the culmination of humanity's internal separation. P12

DUE TO the very success of this separate production of sepa-ration, the fundamental experience that in earlier societies was associated with people's primary work is in the process of being replaced (in sectors near the cutting edge of the system's evolution) by an identification of life with nonworking time, with inactivity. But such inactivity is in no way liberated from productive activity. It remains dependent on it, in an uneasy and admiring submission to the requirements and consequences of the production system. It is itself one of the consequences of that system. There can be no freedom apart from activity, and within the spectacle activity is nullified - all real activity having been forcibly channelled into the global construction of the spectacle. Thus, what is referred to as a "liberation from work," namely the modern increase in leisure time, is neither a liberation of work itself nor a liberation from the world shaped by this kind of work. None of the activity stolen by work can be regained by submitting to what that work has produced. P15

THE ALIENATION of the spectator, which reinforces the contemplated objects that result from his own unconscious activity, works like this: The more he contemplates, the less he lives; the more he identifies with the dominant images of need, the less he understands his own life and his own de-sires. The spectacle's estrangement from the acting subject is expressed by the fact that the individual's gestures are no longer his own; they are the gestures of someone else who represents them to him. The spectator does not feel at home anywhere, because the spectacle is everywhere. P16

THE SPECTACLE's social function is the concrete manufacture of alienation. Economic expansion consists primarily of the expansion of this particular sector of industrial pro-duction. The "growth" generated by an economy developing for its own sake can be nothing other than a growth of the very alienation that was at its origin. P16

36
THE FETISHISM of the commodity - the domination of society by "intangible as well as tangible things" - attains its ultimate fulfilment in the spectacle, where the real world is replaced by a selection of images which are projected above it, yet which at the same time succeed in making themselves regarded as the epitome of reality. P19

Quantitative development over qualitative. P19

Economic growth has liberated societies from the natural pressures that forced them into a mediate struggle survival; but they have not yet been liberated from their liberator. P20

The commodity’s independence has spread to the entire economy it now dominates. This economy has transformed the world, but it has merely transformed it into a work dominated by the economy. Labour is forever in its service. P21

THE SPECTACLE is the stage at which the commodity has succeeded in totally colonizing social life. Commodification is not only visible, we no longer see anything else; the world we see is the world of the commodity. Modern economic production extends its dictatorship both extensively and intensively. P21

STARS - SPECTACULAR representations of living human beings - project this general banality into images of permitted roles. As specialists of apparent life, stars serve as superficial objects that people can identify with in order to compensate for the fragmented productive specializations that they actually live. The function of these celebrities is to act out various lifestyles or socio-political viewpoints in a full, totally free manner. They embody the inaccessible results of social labour by dramatising the by-products of that labour which are magically projected above it as its ultimate goals: power and vacations - the decision making and consumption that are at the beginning and the end of a process that is never questioned. On one hand, a governmental power may per-sonalise itself as a pseudostar; on the other, a star of consumption may campaign for recognition as a pseudopower over life. **But the activities of these stars are not really free, and they offer no real choice**s. P29

67
THE SATISFACTION that no longer comes from using the commodities produced in abundance is now sought through recognition of their value as commodities. Consumers are filled with religious fervour for the sovereign freedom of commodities whose use has become an end in itself. Waves of enthusiasm for particular products are propagated by all the communications media. A film sparks a fashion craze; a magazine publicizes night spots which in turn spin off different lines of products. The proliferation of faddish gadgets reflects the fact that as the mass of commodities becomes increasingly absurd, absurdity itself becomes a commodity.
Trinkets such as key chains which come as free bonuses with the purchase of some luxury product, but which end up being traded back and forth as valued collectibles in their own right, reflect a mystical self-abandonment to commodity transcendence. Those who collect the trinkets that have been manufactured for the sole purpose of being collected are accumulating commodity indulgences - glorious tokens of the commodity's real presence among the faithful. Reified people proudly display the proofs of their intimacy with the commodity. Like the old religious fetishism, with its convul-sionary raptures and miraculous cures, the fetishism of commodities generates its own moments of fervent exaltation. All this is useful for only one purpose: producing habitual submission. P33

68
THE PSEUDONEEDS imposed by modern consumerism cannot be opposed by any genuine needs or desires that are not themselves also shaped by society and its history. But commodity abundance represents a total break in the organic development of social needs. Its mechanical accumulation unleashes an unlimited artificiality which overpowers any living desire. The cumulative power of this autonomous artificiality ends up by falsifying all social life. P34

THE IMAGE of blisful social unification through consump sion merely postpones the consumer's awareness of the acted divisions until his next disillusionment with some particular commodity. Each new product is ceremoniously accaimed as a unique creation offering a dramatic shortcut to the promised land of total consummation. But as with the fashionable adoption of seemingly aristocratic first names which end up being given to virtually all individuals of the same age, the objects that promise uniqueness can be offered up for mass consumption only if they have been mass-produced.
The prestigiousness of mediocre objects of this kind is solely due to the fact that they have been placed, however briefly, at the centre of social life and hailed as a revelation of the un-fathomable purposes of production. But the object that was prestigious in the spectacle becomes mundane as soon as it is taken home by its consumer - and by all its other consumers.

Too late, it reveals its essential poverty, a poverty that inevitably reflects the poverty of its production. Meanwhile, some other object is already replacing it as representative of the system and demanding its own moment of acclaim. P34

Fixated on the delusory centre around which his world seems to move, the spectator no longer experiences life as a journey toward fulfilment and toward death. Once he has given up on really living he can no longer acknowledge his own death. Life insurance ads merely insinuate that he may be guilty of dying without having provided for the smooth continuation of the system following the resultant economic loss, while the promoters of the
"American way of death" stress his capacity to preserve most of the appearances of life in his post-mortem state. On all the other fronts of advertising bombardment it is strictly forbidden to grow old. Everybody is urged to economize on their
"youth-capital," though such capital, however carefully managed, has little prospect of attaining the durable and cumulative properties of economic capital. This social absence of death coincides with the social absence of life. P91

Thus Boorstin concludes that the situation he describes is caused by an unfortunate but almost fortuitous encounter of an excessive technology of image-diffusion with an excessive appetite for sensationalism on the part of today's public. This amounts to blaming the spectacle on modern man's excessive inclination to be a spectator.
Boorstin fails to see that the proliferation of the prefabricated "pseudo-events" he denounces flows from the simple fact that the overwhelming realities of present-day social existence prevent people from actually living events for them-selves. Because history itself haunts modern society like a spectre, pseudo-histories have to be concocted at every level in order to preserve the threatened equilibrium of the present frozen time. P110

IDEOLOGY Is the intellectual basis of class societies within the conflictual course of history. Ideological expressions have never been pure fictions; they represent a distorted consciousness of realities, and as such they have been real factors that have in turn produced real distorting effects. This interconnection is intensified with the advent of the spectacle - the materialization of ideology brought about by the concrete success of an autonomised system of economic production - which virtually identifies social reality with an ideology that has remoulded all reality in its own image. P116