# Status and Culture

Author: W. David Marx
Publication Date: 2022
Year Read: 2025

> Why do individuals cluster around arbitrary behaviors and take deep meaning from them? This phenomenon arises because individuals, in seeking status, must publicly communicate certain conventions as proof of membership in particular groups. P89
> 

"Even if all actors received the same salary," writes the philosopher Bertrand Russell, "a man would rather act the part of Hamlet than that of the First Sailor.” P7

This is why we care more about higher relative income than absolute income. A study found that 70 percent of research subjects would give up a silent raise in salary for a more impressive job title. P8

Cultural changes are never random, nor do they befall us as plagues. Trends happen because individuals choose to take up new behaviors. And when we examine the history of cultural change, there are clear patterns in how humans move from one practice to another. Sixty years before the moptop, social scientist William Graham Sumner seemingly predicted how it would rise and fall: "A new fashion of dress seems at first to be absurd, ungraceful, or indecent. After a time this first impression of it is so dulled that all conform to the fashion." In almost all instances, new behaviors begin as an exclusive practice of smaller social groups-whether elites or outsiders —and then eventually spread to the wider population. This is true for the diffusion of superficial hairstyles but also applies to things not considered "fashions": practical technologies like cars and hybrid seed corn, delicacies like chocolate and gin, political and spiritual beliefs, and the succession of artistic movements in modern art. The thing we call culture is always an aggregation of individual human behaviors, and if taste were the mere product of random idiosyncrasies and irrational psychologies, culture would display no patterns, only noise. The fact that preferences in these disparate fields follow a similar rhythm of change suggests there must be universal principles of human behavior at work—the presence of a "cultural gravity" nudging humans into the same collective behaviors at the same time. P-XIV

Social approval makes us feel that our talents are recognized, and this leads to increased self-esteem. "The familiar yearning to 'be someone' in life," writes Cecilia Ridgeway, "is not so much about money and power as about being publicly seen and acknowledged as worthy and valuable by the community." While we may be embarrassed by outright status seeking, most of us are comfortable with receiving recognition for significant achievements. P9

even if we are seeking esteem rather than superior treatment, we need some form of superior treatment to perceive the esteem. The demand for tangible status benefits thus can't be separated from a desire for respect. This is why bureaucratic institutions always provide more perks to employees who move up the hierarchy. At the Firestone Tire and Rubber Company in the 1950s, every rise to a higher position meant a larger office, with wood rather than glass enclosures, and increased proximity to the chairman. P9

Delinquent and marginal subcultures make a good home for those lacking most forms of capital, as they reward members for a rejection of mainstream values. Fringe groups flip the script and value extreme negations of traditional virtues. In reaction to the Puritan work ethic of proper society, the Beats decided "all effort was uncool, a hassle. From this perspective, membership in alternative status groups appears to be a clever strategy for oppressed and unprivileged individuals to maximize their status. But there is an obvious flaw in this approach: our most immediate community can only provide local status-the ranking inside the small group. Research has shown that local status is more important to personal happiness than global status, especially for self-esteem. And life is easier when living among sympathetic peers. But even if we hide in an alternative status group, we can't escape our global status-the general ranking within broader society. P20/21

Status ultimately describes our specific placement as individuals within a network of others, and how we are treated in that position. When we impress others, our treatment improves. But until now, we've ignored an even more basic determinant of status. To be a good member in any group requires following certain rules. This is where status and culture first intersect. P23

Conventions are not just floating molecules that make up culture but also wield remarkable powers over humans in three key ways: (1) they regulate our behavior; (2) they become internalized as habits; and (3) they change our perception of the world. And from whence do conventions draw their power? Sta-tus. We ultimately follow conventions to gain social approval and avoid social disapproval, and in doing so, they change our behaviors and organize the data we gather from our senses. p28/29

For a convention to take root within a community and become "regular" behavior, it must become part of common knowledge-where individuals know something, know that others know it, know that others know that they know it, and know that others know that they know that they know it, ad infinitum. P29

Once es. tablished, conventions then draw an additional power from emotional responses to expectations. Our brains prefer when other people meet our expectations, because this means we don't have to expend extra mental energy on thinking through alternatives. When others fail to meet our expectations in a negative way, we become frustrated and angry-even in times when the underlying behavior has no material impact on us. We then convert these emotional re-sponses, either positive or negative, into outward expressions of our feelings.
Meeting expectations elicits smiles and cheers. When they aren't met, the sociologist George Homans writes, an individual has in effect been deprived of a reward, and he repays deprivation with hostility." P30

We learn conventions from our family and friends through the chameleon effect, where we unconsciously mimic our peers in body movements and speech. We learn that these behaviors are associated with certain meanings and values: what's right, what's wrong, what goes with what. This process converts conventions into habits. P31

Internalization unlocks the final power of conventions: setting our perceptual framework for observing the world. Our senses may gather information, but that information is then interpreted through a screen of conventional habits, beliefs, and knowledge. Depending on our cultural background, we hear, see, remember, and pay attention to things differently. The perception of time, for example, is a convention. P32

Culture, writes anthropologist Marshall Sahlins, consists of "meaningful orders of persons and things." Conventions explain not only why certain persons do certain things, but the origin of collective meanings and orders. To follow the same arbitrary rules as another individual is to be part of the same "collectiv-ity." As groups share certain practices, those practices form social bonds. The convention of wearing lederhosen and dirndl defines Bavarians as a people. Debutante balls are a rite of passage for wealthy WASP women. Russians don't just drink vodka as a stiff tipple—it's the lifeblood of the nation. P33/34

The literary scholar Raymond Williams called culture "one of the two or three most complicated words in the English language." Indeed: the 1952 book Culture: A Critical Review of Concepts and Definitions alone offers 150 defini-tions. Even our colloquial usage remains ambiguous: Is culture a way of life, fine art, pop culture, or organizational norms? While we may be no closer here to settling on a singular definition, we at least know what culture is "made of*: conventions are the individual units of culture. Everything we point to as
"culture" —customs, traditions, fashions, and fads— exists as conventions. P35

Conventional differences by status tier are inevitable because there must be observable ways to mark differences in rank. A superiority of position should be reflected in the superiority of benefits. While organizations often contrive these differences, they can also occur naturally. Stratification determines the social space we inhabit, and our family and closest friends tend to be at similar status levels. After spending time in the same community, we come to share the same habitus and lifestyle conventions. These are expressed in the expense, quality, and design of possessions; speech patterns (use of polite language or slang): means of earning a living: self-presentation (dress, hair, makeup, fit-ness); location and quality of domiciles; and hired services (do we mow the lawn or do we pay someone else to do it?). Max Weber noted, "Social status is normally expressed above all in the imputation of a specifically regulated style of life to everyone who wishes to belong to the circle." Lifestyle, in other words, is both a requirement of social rank and an expression of it. P37

recent neuroscience experiment discovered that subjects preferred cheaper wines when unaware of the price, and then preferred the taste of expensive wines once prices were revealed. More interestingly, the subjects' pathways of brain activity changed along with their change in preference. P40

While there may be a philosophical origin to this obsession with individual distinction, these demands also match the internal logic of status structures. Emulation requires imitating the group above you, but for those at the top of the hierarchy, there should be no one to imitate. A good indication of having super-high status, then, is being able to get away with distinctive acts. The moral duty of self-actualization is actually a status duty: individuals at the top of the hierarchy must pursue unique behaviors and distinctive choices. The suits of former Egyptian leader Hosni Mubarak didn't just use custom wool but had pinstripes that spelled out his name in Arabic. P46

Humans have an innate predisposition to imitate, but in modern times we must reconcile this with a moral duty to be distinct. To gain status, then, we must balance four specific requirements of imitation and distinction:

- To secure normal status, we must imitate group conventions.
- To avoid low status, we must counterimitate rival conventions.
- To gain higher status, we must emulate conventions with high status value.
- To achieve the highest status, we must strive for individual distinction through unique behavior.

No individual can pursue all four simultaneously. Instead we're likely to choose a specific risk-mitigation strategy that best matches our status position. P48

Boasting and bragging thus become an implicit sign of low status. Here we land upon the principle of detachment: very high-status individuals should seem detached from active attempts to gain status. In fact, the most successful status claims should never appear to be status claims. P34

As we just learned, status appraisers look for clues in our demeanor and possessions to estimate status, and so the most obvious way to signal a high social position is to show off certain goods or engage in certain behaviors with high status value. This begins inside the home. Simone de Beauvoir writes,
"The home is not merely an interior within which the couple is shut away; it is also the expression of that couple's standard of life, its financial status, its taste, and thus the home must need be on view to other people." P56

Companies that produce luxury goods, from Louis Vuitton to Tiffany, Rolex, and Dom Perignon, understand the need for alibis, and their marketing provides detailed explanations of great craftsmanship, rare materials, unsurpassed com-fort, and the highest levels of quality control. And yet, luxury goods never work as luxury goods based purely on functionality. They also must have status value. The philosopher Jean Baudrillard writes, "The functionality of goods comes afferward, adjusting itself to, rationalizing and at the same time repressIng these fundamental structural mechanisms." The best proof of this can be found in the fact that luxury goods that are initially exclusive to a small segment of the population, such as nutmeg or air-conditioning, cease to be luxuries once they're widely available despite their quality improving over time. P57

the principle of associativity:
*When two objects have frequently been seen together, the imagination requires a habit of passing easily from one to the other. If the first is to appear, we lay our account that the second is to follow." Status symbols rely on these associations. Harvestores became symbols of farming success, because the most successful farmers owned them. Playing squash suggests relations with the high-status people who play it. Status symbols, therefore, must have clear associations with high-status groups. Poorer farmers paid double for Harvestore silos because they promised a means to be appraised as wealthy. Beck name-dropped noise artist Keij Haino because the most erudite indie music fans loved his music. P58

Cachet powers the often elusive concept "cool"; nothing can be cool without associations to particular groups of high-status individuals, namely, musicians, celebrities, and popular teens. P59

There are five common signaling costs. The first and most obvious is money.
Since wealth correlates to status position in capitalist society, most status symbols are expensive. English-style horseback riding has status value because it's an expensive skill to learn. The second cost is time. A PhD signals experience because it takes years and years of education and validation from established professors. This is why traditional societies treat older people with high status: their valuable wisdom can only be accrued from decades of living.
The third cost is exclusive access. High-status people are granted access to restricted locations where they attend special events. There they acquire things unavailable to others. In the world of rowing, the Cambridge University Boat Club's mint-blue Beefeater T-shirt is very prestigious, since the only legitimate ways to acquire one are rowing for Cambridge or trading jerseys with them after a race. The fourth cost is cultural capital-knowledge of conventions acquired through spending time among high-status people. For example, espousing credible and detailed opinions about the relative merits of Harvard College's freshman dorms Thayer and Holworthy is limited to the school's former and current undergraduates.
The final cost is norm breaking. As we learned in the last chapter, breaking a convention leads to social disapproval. Using their leeway to be different, elites can more easily pay the costs of social disapproval. Arthur Capel, Coco Chanel's wealthy lover, dined in elegant restaurants wearing a casual sports jacket rather than a formal dinner jacket "because it pleased him to give an impression of strength and rudeness." P60

In understanding the effects of status on individual behavior, we have arrived at a paramount concern of modern life: Who am I? We now understand the myriad difficulties of landing upon clear answers. Which "I" are we talking about? There appear to be three: persona, identity, and self. In signaling, we build personas-observable packages of signals, taste, sensibility, immutable characteristics, and cues absorbed from our upbringing and background. Others use this persona to determine our identity. At the same time, we have a self within our minds, known only to us. Persona, identity, and self are never quite the same. All of the additions, subtractions, and redactions made for status can cause our persona to feel like an ersatz, sanitized, cardboard cut-out version of the self. And if others classify us based on this highly edited persona, our public identity may drift far from "the real me.” P82

Why do individuals cluster around arbitrary behaviors and take deep meaning from them? This phenomenon arises because individuals, in seeking status, must publicly communicate certain conventions as proof of membership in particular groups. P89

Youth subcultures are rarely artistic or design collectives, which means their stylistic innovations tend to adapt, warp, and blend preexisting looks and commodities rather than create new looks from scratch. The teddy boys pilfered their signature look from Savile Row. Most subcultural and countercultural innovation thus begins as bricolage-the mixing and matching of preexisting styles and objects to imbue them with new meanings. Since teenagers are confined to a distinct geographical space with limited pocket money, they must repurpose common objects to construct a unique look. The first British subcultures focused on tailored suits, because tailoring was standard at the time.
Mods rode scooters because they couldn't afford cars. Early bosozoku bikers in Japan wore their dokajan cold-weather jackets from construction and janitorial jobs. P130

Unambiguous distinction requires tall fences, and there must be high sig. naling costs to keep out normies. Subcultural and countercultural styles require significant expenditures of time, money, and reputation. The tailored teddy boy suit was extremely expensive for a young blue-collar laborer in the 1950s, and the teds' elaborate, time-consuming quiffs were a form of conspicuous waste. Both dissuaded halfhearted teds. When groups have anticommercialist tendencies, like punks and hippies, the requirements may instead focus on extravagant changes to appearance, such as body piercings and mohawks. P130

Over time rebellious styles eventually become conventional within alternative status groups and, at that point, members must adhere to them to receive normal status. To be a Juggalo—a fan of the music group Insane Clown Posse-members are expected to dress in oversized red and black garments, drink large quantities of low-priced Faygo soda, tattoo the band's Hatchetman logo on their bodies, and greet fellow Juggalos with the salute "whoop whoop." Just as the wealthy have cultural capital, subcultures develop subcultural capi-tal. There is a correct way of being a Juggalo just as there's a correct way of being Old Money. Upon visiting the Gathering of the Juggalos music festival, the non-Juggalo writer Kent Russell noted the ubiquity of the Hatchetman logo: "I saw the Hatchetman stitched onto shirts, pants, cheer shorts, bikini tops, beanies, caps, and shoes; shaved into heads and chests; and tattooed on so many pounds of lacquered flesh—on arms, shoulders, forearms, over the avian bones on the backs of hands, across necks and asses, in the lee of breasts, on calves, clavicles, and feet." Russell, by contrast, lacked this subcultural cap-ital: no Hatchetman tattoo and no familiarity with the right way to say "whoop whoop." He quickly fell to the lowest status within the Juggalo micro-society and spent his days under "showers of refuse" as festival goers constantly threw garbage at him. P131

The requirements on members can get more extreme when subcultures start to shrink in size. As ganguro scared away normal girls from the kogyaru style, the remaining members developed their own unique looks on the streets of Tokyo, incomprehensible to outsiders. This phenomenon echoes a principle seen in linguistics: languages of small Indigenous populations develop more complicated grammars and more difficult sounds than widely spoken tongues. When subcultures are small cults, the most dedicated members receive more status than hangers-on, which incentivizes the core members to indulge in even more extreme practices with higher signalling costs. P132

Because alternative status groups can never actually replace the masses, they can achieve influence only through being imitated. But how do their radical inventions take on cachet? There are two key pathways: the creative class and the youth consumer market. P134

The primary sites for subculture/creative-class cross-pollination have been art schools and underground music scenes. The punk community, in particular, arose as an alliance between the British working class and students in art and fashion schools. Once this network was formed, punk's embrace of reggae elevated Jamaican music into the British mainstream as well. Similarly, New York's downtown art scene supported Bronx hip-hop before many African American radio stations took rap seriously. P135

With so many cultural trends starting among the creative classes and ethnic subcultures, companies may not understand these innovations but gamble that they will be profitable in their appeal to middle-class youth. P136

Mass media, in needing to explain subcultures to readers, defines the undefined— and exaggerates where necessary. P137

This simplification inherent in the marketing process lowers fences and signaling costs, allowing anyone to be a punk or hip-hopper through a few commercial transactions. P137

In October 1967, a group of longtime counter-cultural figures held a "Death of the Hippie" mock funeral on the streets of San Francisco to persuade the media to stop covering their movement. Looking back at the sixties, journalist Nik Cohn noted that these groups' rise and fall always followed a similar pattern:

One by one, they would form underground and lay down their basic premises, to be followed with near-millennial fervor by a very small number; then they would emerge into daylight and begin to spread from district to district; then they would catch fire suddenly and produce a national explosion; then they would attract regiments of hangers-on and they would be milked by industry and paraded endlessly by media; and then, robbed of all novelty and impact, they would die. P137/138

In the eighteenth century, philosopher Immanuel Kant asserted three still authoritative criteria for artistic genius: (1) the creation of fiercely original works, (2) which over time become imitated as exemplars, and (3) are created through mysterious and seemingly inimitable methods. P145

When artists cut too deep into standard conventions in pursuit of artistic value, audiences often renounce the changes. Music listeners are happy with small surprises but expect conformity to familiar notions of melody, harmony, and rhythm. Yet deep cuts are required to achieve artistic value. This is why Gertrude Stein noted that all important art is "irritating" and Marcel Duchamp quipped, "A painting that doesn't shock isn't worth painting." In the early days of modern art, indignation became a clear sign of artistic success. With the appearance of Duchamp's Nude Descending a Staircase at the 1913 Armory Show in New York, the painting "baffled and outraged so many visitors" that it became "the most famous painting of the modern era."
This poses a logistical problem for creators: until they are accepted as high-status artists, transgressive behavior may be met with social disapproval and low status. "Matisse and Picasso in 1900," theorist René Girard reminds us,
"were considered incompetent by 99 per cent of their contemporaries." This helped form the stereotype of the struggling and misunderstood artist, sacrificing all immediate human relationships in pursuit of deeper universal truths.
Aspiring artists must have a high tolerance for societal rejection— enough self. confidence, perspicacity, faith, or insanity to continue working against the backlash. Defiance is easy for self-centered narcissists; George Orwell listed
"sheer egoism" as a primary motivation for writers. Mental disorders that numb the fear of punishment also improve the calculus of risk taking. P152

The most natural candidates for radical invention, then, are creators who see themselves as having low status. At the bottom of the pyramid, there is little to lose and much to gain. This explains why youth tend to be more radical than adults. Andy Warhol believed that "it's easy for a young person to support new ideas. He comes onto the scene fresh. He doesn't have any positions to defend or modify, no big time or money imested. He can be a brat, say whatever he pleases, support whatever and whoever he wants to without having to think, Will they ever invite me to dinner again?" Poor treatment and inadequate respect also give young creators an easy way to justify their rebellion. P153

The battle for artist status in the pursuit of artistic value turns the art world into a battlefield between aspiring and established artists, Upstarts propose radical oppositions to the reigning styles, and once they succeed, a new generation of upstarts propose radical oppositions to the previous radical oppositions.
This is why the story of art tends to be dialectical. Instead of slow, incremental changes to methods and concepts, art movements quickly swing from one extreme position to another. The social realist school of painting promoted the idea that art should work to support revolutionary politics. The next generation, the abstract expressionists, demolished the social realist approach by refusing to use representational forms that could be used for propaganda. Then the pop artists rejected the abstract expressionists' purism by adding elements of commercial kitsch to the canvas. A decade later, minimalists renounced pop's colorful media references to make the most reductionist art possible. P154

Once most audiences expect new art to conform to esoteric ideas, such as silence as music, the ideas are no longer radical but simply conventional. In more commercial fields like popular music, this stage of conventionality entices less ambitious creators to turn formerly dangerous innovations into audience-friendly works. The pop critic Dan Ozzi notes, "Whenever a truly innovative artist defines a new sound, it gets carbon copied for at least a decade until what's left is an embarrassing abomination bearing almost no resemblance to the spirit of the original." Nirvana topped the charts with stylistic innovations borrowed from the cult act the Pixies; once grunge hit big, Nirvana copycats Bush and Stone Temple Pilots collectively sold fourteen million albums for their work in obvious grunge idioms. P158

The literary critic Jonathan Culler writes, "Aesthetic expression aims to communicate notions, subtleties, complexities which have not yet been formulated, and therefore, as soon as an aesthetic code comes to be generally perceived as a code... then works of art tend to move beyond this code." Radical artists are often uneasy about their particular idiolect becoming too well understood. Jean Baudrillard notes that the successful artist is "condemned" to repetition, as audiences will ask for more and more of the same. The music group the KLF warned that most hit artists "spend the rest of their lives as a travelling freak show, peddling a nostalgia for those now far off, carefree days.” P159

The most ambitious artists never abandon their rebellious spirit and attempt to negate their own conventions on a constant basis. To prevent a "School of Satie," Erik Satie altered his own style for each new series of compositions.
In the 196os John Cage pledged, "Whenever I've found that what I'm doing has become pleasing, even to one person, I have redoubled my efforts to find the next step." This ceaseless search for innovation tends to work very well for already established artists. In the case of the Beatles, writes critic Ian MacDon-ald, "They kept [their music) from becoming stale by continually investigating new methods and concepts: beginning and ending songs in the wrong key, employing modal, pentatonic, and Indian scales, incorporating studio-effects and exotic instruments, and shuffling rhythms and idioms with a unique versatility." P159

Societies that value radical invention end up with more diverse cultural ecosystems, a great abundance of artefacts, and a multiplicity of sensibilities. But there are two downsides. First, radical negation tends to "exhaust" itself by eventually doubling back to the starting point. The modernist poet Octavio Paz stated in the early 1970s, "Rebellion has turned into procedure, criticism into rhetoric, transgression into ceremony. Negation is no longer creative." This led to much confusion about next steps in the "postmodern" era, and one approach was to return to pre-modern ideas. At the 1981 A New Spirit in Painting exhibition at the Royal Academy of Arts in London, the critic Peter Fuller was shocked to find that the youngest painters had embraced traditional painterly goals: "apparent conservatism" was now the "progressive" option. P162

Second, the demands for originality pushed many artists to disturb conventions so deeply embedded in our brains that the artworks never found large audiences. Art that rejects aesthetic value in pursuit of artistic value often stagnates as "meta-art"-intellectual exercises with little emotional resonance.
Without inclusive aesthetic experiences, art becomes trapped within elite cir-cles. Few enjoy Schoenberg's twelve-tone composition as they do Beethoven's classical harmonies.
For most of the twentieth century, status struggles provided us with the incredible cultural diversity we enjoy in the present. And our gratitude for the artists and creators has, in turn, created more tolerance toward a wide range of
"deviants" who may provide our future cultural enrichment. This direct connection between status competition and creativity has also revealed a few clues to solving the final part of the Grand Mystery of Culture: Why do we change behaviors over time, and why do some behaviors persist? For both art and subcul-tures, cachet from elite groups brought more individuals into new styles and persuaded initial detractors to accept irritating and norm-breaking ideas. Next, in part 3, we'll better understand exactly why populations move from one convention to another: the internal mechanisms inherent in the status hierarchy work as a motor for perpetual cultural change. P163

most people seek to participate publicly in new trends only where status value becomes obviously positive. P173

Invention may arise anywhere in society, but its broader diffusion requires a boost of cachet. In needing exclusive goods and practices, high-status individuals are attracted to stylistic or technological innovations, precisely because they emerge, by definition, among a small number of adopters. This is where status seeking first intertwines with the diffusion of innovations. Innovativeness— the willingness to try out new things—increases as one moves up the status hierarchy from the middle tiers. Elites have a need to engage in exclusive behaviors, and the privilege to do so. P174

Status also explains why innovativeness is found at the bottom of society as well. Outsiders, exiles, and misfits don't worry about the social risks of trying new things, because they have little status to lose. The principle of cachet, how-ever, means that low-status convention-breaking is viewed as "deviance" and may not inspire any immediate imitation. High-status convention-breaking, on the other hand, kicks off emulation and becomes understood as a noble act of innovation. P174

Since the very top elites are rarely craftspeople themselves, they must procure their status symbols from elsewhere. Elites flock to three particular categories of items that fulfill their needs: rarities, novelties, and technological innovations. P175

"There are no unlabeled fads or fashions," write the sociologists Rolf Meyerson and Elihu Katz. Organizations are aware of this power and deploy new names for alienating phenomena to improve perceptions. "Punk" scared away radio stations, so an executive at Sire Records asked radio stations to call aggressive young bands New Wave instead. Americans in the 1990s loathed European "techno," so Spin magazine rechristened it "electronica.” P179

Mass production is where status logic collides with raw economic logic.
Companies find it difficult to profit in unstable and unpredictable cultural markets and, as a way to minimize risk, they converge upon a production logic— tacit rules that shape the content and form of artworks, styles, and products in order to increase chances of mainstream consumer adoption. Production logic infects not only the form and content of mass-market films, songs, and TV shows, but the design of products, the specific marketing techniques used to sell them, and the tenor of advertising messages. The Manual outlines the production logic behind pop music and, in doing so, implies the actual song behind a hit is arbitrary—it can even be "excruciating"— as long as it conforms to the audience's desired forms. P189

Publicity and physical distribution also help achieve the repetition required to build common knowledge. Repeated observations are powerful for inducing new behaviors-what psychologists call the mere exposure effect. An enormous body of research has shown that repeated exposure makes us like things more.
This analysis, however, often misses an important factor. Exposure works best for legitimized innovations. Despite a widespread and striking purple-colored ad blitz for the religious group Falun Gong's Shen Yun dance performances, the show has made no significant impact on American culture. Top 40 radio, by contrast, can tap the mere exposure effect because listeners already trust Top 40 radio as a musical authority. P193/194

Forget trickle-down, says anthropologist Grant McCracken. Fashion is a mever-ending process of "chase and flight." Low-status individuals chase high-status individuals by imitating their conventions, which forces elites to flee to new ones. Since this fleeing will lead to another round of chasing and them fleeing. fashion creates perpetual cultural change, with status serving as the motor. P197

The more rational means of improving status would be to reinvest money and time into building more stable forms of capital. The acquisition of status symbols may fool others in the short term, but constant consumption resembles a form af addiction: we believe luxury goods are a cure for our status desires, only to realize we must buy ever more. P199

What is the appeal of historical value? First, there is a survivorship bias: anything that remains with us today is assumed to have greater intrinsic value. Humans are more likely to preserve high-quality luxury goods than cheap kitsch. This certainly applies to artworks. Philosopher David Hume muses, "A real genius, the longer his works endure, and the more wide they are spread, the more sincere is the admiration which he meets with." This explains why "the same Homer, who pleased at Athens and Rome two thousand years ago, is still admired at Paris and at London." We also extend this principle to everyday behaviors. An arbitrary practice must be worth continuing if generation after generation has decided to choose it over alternatives. P206

Popularity can keep works in the collective dialogue, but critical appraisal is more important for long-term survival. This moves the canon toward elite tastes and away from kitsch. Chuck Klosterman writes, "We don't reinvestigate low culture with the expectation that it will entertain us a second time." Romance novelist Danielle Steel has sold enough paperbacks of her 190 books to heat a large city through winter, but unlike the major canonized works of our era, many of her titles lack Wikipedia pages. P209

Taste matters in canon building because critics and editors form their reputations when choosing works. They don't want to be on the record for embracing things with anticachet. P210

Retro is inevitable in fashion cycles. As poet and playwright Jean Cocteau observes: "Art produces ugly things which frequently become more beautiful with time. Fashion, on the other hand, produces beautiful things which always become ugly with time." Fashion cycles conclude with once coveted innovations ceded to laggards, and our brains interpret the resulting anticachet as "ugliness." Philosopher Walter Benjamin writes, *Each generation expetiences the fashion of the one immediately preceding it as the most radical antiaplaro-disiac imaginable." This is particularly true of kitsch, as it has few redeeming qualities to cushion its fall from grace. P214/215

After contaminated trends are fully abandoned, they may be forgotten. And as negative symbolic associations fade, the trends are primed for a comeback. Once a convention is removed from "circulation and consideration"-and no longer associated with present-day adopters- innovators can resurrect it as a new means of distinction. The Adidas Country sneaker debuted in 1971 as a suburban cross-country shoe popular with "corny preppy kids." But by 1987 it had disappeared from suburban culture, allowing New York's hip-hop elites to embrace it as their own. P215

Youth raise their cultural fences on a budget— digging through bargain bins, thrift shops, garage sales, and Goodwill stores for ugly old things that will horrify adults. Youth love old kitsch because they'll never be confused for the original adopters. A nineteen-year-old pink-haired art school student in a hideous nylon bowling jacket is unlikely to be an actual member of the Old Baldy Shrine Club. P215

The second wave of a trend is always more exaggerated and less radical. Retro trends can never be as dangerous as the original. A true radical innovation triggers a fear of the unknown; its retro revival is ugly in a very familiar way. Teddy boys were violent working-class delinquents in a conservative postwar Britain; teddy boy revivalists of the 1970s were harmless music fans and weekend hobbyists. Parody and camp prefer mannerist interpretations over accurate reproductions. P217

Each generation overvalues the art popular during their youth, and their hunger for nostalgia as wealthy adults pushes pop culture toward their particular sensibilities. P219

Historical value exists precisely because the past can be a viable cultural guide for the present. When we seek an escape from stale, boring, corrupt, or decadent times, we can always delve back into history for inspiration. P220

This transitoriness perhaps makes viral content the most representative form of culture in the twenty-first century: an era of vast quantities, deep specificity, and breakneck speed, where few individual artifacts, artworks, or conventions leave a dent in society or bend the curve of history. Viral culture lacks depth and weight, and it creates few new sensibilities or styles. And yet viral content resembles "real" culture: we consume silly videos just as we watched videos on MTV, read Twitter as we read newspaper articles, pin aspirational visuals to Pinterest boards like posters on a dorm room wall. We had high hopes for the internet: an infinite reservoir of content, free distribution, a broader canon, and a more diverse creator base, which would inspire more people to make more amazing things. But this "deluge" of digital culture, writes film critic A. O. Scott,
"is often perceived as a drought." P224/225

The most vocal complaint against "the culture wars" is that it channels political energy to changing superficial symbols rather than working toward structural changes to the economy and the law. But everything in this book points to the fact that culture matters for status equality. Status criteria live inside of our conventions, and history has shown us that altering those criteria opens up social mobility for disadvantaged groups. Culture sets what is permissible and what is possible. As Black culture attracted huge audiences among white youth in the twentieth century, cultural flows became more complicated than upper-class trickle-down. The appreciation of minority culture within elite cultural capital didn't overturn the status structure or eradicate racism, but it has arguably better distributed money and status to disadvantaged communities. P244

Hypermodern liberalism and cosmopolitanism thus lead to omnivorism and poptimism-and even a detente with capitalism, as long as the spoils flow to the right people. By seeking a fairer distribution of money to disadvantaged groups and the dissemination of antiracist messages through mainstream media channels, cultural politics works within the mass market. In its wake, any negative notions of selling out must go. And art should avoid being for art's sake when social equity is at stake. Hustling is a virtuous necessity for those without capital; detachment is a privilege. Rappers are right to demand "money, power, and respect" because they grew up without them. P243

Omnivorism also may have a dampening effect on the cultural ecosystem. If the "friction" of status struggles is an important creative force, omnivorism defuses tensions within the social groups most likely to create new conven-tions: namely, artists, the creative class, the media, and subcultures. Much great art and culture arose from righteous indignation toward bad taste, com-mercialist kitsch, and the conservative establishment. By eliminating these as legitimate targets for criticism we create much weaker, less meaningful con-ventions. T. S. Eliot warned in the 194os, "A world culture which was simply a uniform culture would be no culture at all." The idea of omnivorism is to support demographically marginalized creators in the short run, but these groups' previous use of radical taste in erecting their own tall fences often created great cultural value for the community in the long run. P246

The music producer and writer Nick Sylvester worries, "By embracing the project of pop music, we might be complicit in letting our underground ecosystems dry up and making pop become the only game in town." By denying taste as a tool and hesitating to criticize popular works, outsider groups and critics have surrendered their primary way of pushing back. We now risk living in the world that essayist George W. S. Trow predicted in the 1980s: "Nothing was judged—only counted." P246/247

sociologist David Muggleton writes, "Perhaps the very concept of subculture is becoming less applicable in postmodernity, for the breakdown of mass society has ensured that there is no longer a coherent dominant culture against which a subculture can express its resistance." Under the banner of cosmopolitanism, demographically disadvantaged groups no longer have to seek shelter in walled-off mini-societies. P248

Avi, a twenty-six-year-old Indonesian fan of the Korean boy band BTS, told The New York Times, "It feels like we're promoting BTS, but we are also promoting our own voices, our own struggles, our own hope for a better world." Fan groups have channeled this intensity toward real outcomes in the cultural marketplace. Thanks to the BTS Army, the group can reach number one on Billboard before reaching the passive consumption that once marked the meaning of "mainstream" success. P248/249

In hindsight, retromania appears to have been a response to the plummeting cachet of contemporary culture. Between virality, a destruction of barriers to information and access, the celebration of simple nouveau riche aesthetics, and a rejection of taste, inventions haven't taken on as much status value as in the past. Meanwhile, we feel more pressure to be "authentic," which raises the bar for switching to new things. Before we consider adoption, new styles must prove they aren't fads-and they're mostly fads. With contemporary status value on the wane, historical value rises to the fore. The reliable past is more useful for crafting personas than an ephemeral present. P252/253

With so little new art being cancized, perhaps the goal of permanence no longer provides motivation to creators anyway. Cashing in as a "creator" is a higher path to status than being honored as an "artist" in obscure circles. P255

To be broadcasted required being on television, which was limited to very few. Today anyone with a smartphone and an internet connec tion can be broadcasted. Yet the sheer act of mediation still manages to make individuals seem more charismatic. But why should we still be enamored with fame at all when fame is so cheap? Maybe soon we won't be. And there are many other values we're likely to abandon as the internet age becomes the only age we know: historical value, artistic legacy, authenticity. P258

Status structures provide the underlying conventions for each culture, which determine our behaviors, values, and perception of reality. Behaviors and objects with status value are good, beautiful, and desirable; those without are bad, ugly, and use-less. The struggle for higher status-whether striving for basic equality or angling for the very top —shapes individual identities, spurs creativity and cultural change, and forms customs and traditions. P262

every human choice is a direct result of status seeking, but when attempting to explain cultural change on a macro level, status value should be considered as the primary factor. Taste is never only about the thing itself-e.g., the flavor of a wine or the mechanical superiority of a car. Civilization is fundamentally symbolic, and every choice communicates social position. This suggests that evolutionary biology, neuroscience, and mathematical modeling, taken in isolation, aren't sufficient for diagnosing cultural patterns. Questions of aesthetics and taste are ultimately tied to status. P264

The status of adopters is a critical factor for not just understanding the cultural implications of any trend, but also forecasting its future prospects. By a purely mathematical measure, 199I was a successful year for thermochromic shirt brand Hypercolor: $50 million in sales over just four months. But its hasty overexpansion tanked the cachet and, just a year later, the company filed for bankruptcy. In those same years, the streetwear brand Stüssy intentionally undersupplied the demand for its clothes—i.e., it refused to go viral. On the occasion of Stüssy's fortieth anniversary, GQ named it "streetwear's first heritage brand.” P265

For many, "viral contagion" is an attractive metaphor for understanding culture precisely because it frames taste as an empirically observable phenomenon without any political implications. The "neutral" model of cultural diffusion is neutral: humans randomly imitate one another without any consideration of hierarchy or privilege. Status, by contrast, adds an uncomfortable political valence to every trend and custom. P265

Radical political movements have attempted to rectify these status inequalities through fiat, only to witness elites quietly deploy new means of distinction. The Soviet Union abolished private property, flattened salaries, and downplayed consumerism, and yet status hierarchies popped up in bureaucratic micro-positions, apartment sizes, and the procurement of foreign goods. Humans are adept at turning any small advantage into a status marker. In exploring the history of dental hygiene, the writer Molly Young notes, "As soon as it became possible for a slice of society to have good teeth, it became possible for them to humiliate the rest of society for having bad teeth. Smiling became a sole privilege of the rich: If the eyes were the window to a man's soul, his mouth was now the window to his bank account." P268