# The Status Game

Author: Will Storr
Publication Date: 2021
Year Read: 2024

It's in this way that we exist as a tribe, a culture, a people. We come into being as a collective when we connect with like-minded others whose brains process reality in similar ways; who dream the same dream of life. We recognise the same symbols; play the same game. As we do, we become the source of each other's status, the people of the yam. We see the yam, we know what it means, we experience a profound sense of connection with those who perceive this reality as we do. We play the yam game as a single organism, feeding one another status when we judge it's been earned. Over decades of worry, strategy and toil we pursue it, using shared symbols to build great kingdoms of meaning. These kingdoms - these virtual, connected, brain-generated hallucinations of reality - are the realms in which we exist. Our status game is a place. It's our neural territory, our world. P30

The dream state we exist in is founded on objective truth - we're alive on a planet, breathing air under skies. But on these foundations we build an infinite variety of imaginary games. Groups of people gather together, agree what symbols they're going to use to mean 'status', then strive to achieve it. These symbols might take the form of money or power or a plastic dumper truck in a kindergarten toy box. They might be a luxury logo or some sexy abs or an academic prize or a gigantic yam. The dream of the mind projects value onto these symbols - so much value we can be driven to fight and die for them. It tells us a story that says they're of glorious importance: that our gods are real and our pursuit of them is holy.
It makes us feel, not like players of games, but heroes on journeys towards destinations of wonder. We believe this story. It's woven into our perception of reality. It feels no less real than the planet, air and sky. But the truth of human life is that it's a set of hallucinatory games organised around symbols. These games are an act of shared imagination. They come into being in the neural realms of those with whom we choose to play - our kin, our tribe, our people. P31

human life is comprised of three varieties of status-striving and three varieties of game: dominance, virtue and success. In dominance games, status is coerced by force or fear. In virtue games, status is awarded to players who are conspicuously dutiful, obedient and moralistic. In success games, status is awarded for the achievement of closely specified outcomes, beyond simply winning, that require skill, talent or knowledge. Mafias and armies are dominance games.
Religions and royal institutions are virtue games. Corporations and sporting contests are success games. P39

Secondly, we could earn prestige-based status by being virtuous: by demonstrating beliefs or behaviours that served the group's interests. This kind of status is awarded to those who show concern for the public good, display commitment to the group or enforce its rules. They'll also rise up the rankings if they're thought of as being courageous or generous towards their co-players. P43

In order to be able to play the two varieties of prestige game (success and virtuous), our brains had to develop an unusual ability. Prestige games are symbolic.
Unlike physical dominance contests, they're not played with our actual selves, but with our reputation. We can think of our reputation as a symbolic version of us that exists in the minds of others. P43

The brain is coded to seek four main cues that, once detected, trigger their focus. Firstly, we look for the self-similarity cue. We make the assumption we're most likely to learn useful lessons from people like us. We have an inbuilt preference for those who match our age, race and gender. We attend to them, and thus offer them status, preferentially. This is a deep source of much of the cliquish-ness and prejudice that pollutes so many status games. Sadly, it seems automatic. Even very young infants defer to strangers who share their mother's dialect.
Next we look for 'skill cues'. Who, in our game, seems particularly able? Research suggests we start mimicking people who display competence at tasks at around 14 months. We also seek out 'success cues' - status symbols such as an experienced hunter's necklace of teeth; a tribal chief's larger hut; a PhD; a pair of Manolo Blahnik's Lurums. Our desire to signal success in this way is the cause of the
"conspicuous consumption' that occurs across the world. The global luxury market is worth around $1.2 trillion per year, with $285 billion being spent on goods, much of it in Asia. Members of the Amazonian Tsimane tribe who earn more money than others burn up a greater percentage of it on flashy goods such as watches; over in the West, if you want to, you can buy a Franck Muller Aeternitas Mega 4 watch for $2.7 million.
Finally, we look for 'prestige cues': we analyse the body language, eye movements and voice patterns of our co-players to see who they're deferring to. We detect similar clues in the behaviour of prestigious people themselves. Then, we start paying attention to them. These processes are potent and ancient and designed to operate in small groups, not the colossal modern environment of global media and internet. Today it's not uncommon for millions to pay attention to one person simply because millions of others are paying attention to them and for this to become a feedback loop, sending a relatively unremarkable individual into the distant upper reaches of planetary status. Academics call this 'The Paris Hilton Effect'. P49/50

This is how cultures often progress. At the core of the process is our individual tendency to mimic prestigious people in the hope that we'll become prestigious ourselves. P52

often assume money or fancy possessions are the most certain symbols of a person's rank, but the highest-status monk in the world may have less wealth, and fewer Hermès ties, than the most junior banker on Wall Street. Influence is different.
Of course, it's not a perfect signal of status; someone low-ranking could influence others with gossip, flattery or lies. But it is an immediate and predictable result of it. Even in small-scale societies, a person's status is commonly expressed in their capacity to influence: they tend to be more prominent in group discussions, to make their opinions known and their suggestions clear, and to articulate the consensus once it is determined'. The outsized influence that high-status players exert can also be measured in how much they talk.
One study of premodern societies found top-ranking members spoke fifteen times more frequently than those at the bottom, and almost five times more than those one rank beneath them.
Influence is a useful signal in dominance games, in which it manifests as power, and also in the two prestige games where it's willingly offered by co-players. Wherever you track trails of influence - of people deferring, altering their beliefs or behaviour to match those of the people above them - you'll find status games being played and won. We frequently measure our own level of status by our capacity to influence. Our status detection systems monitor the extent body language and tone.
to which others defer to us in the subtlest negotiations of behaviour, This is one reason we can take it so personally when our ideas, tastes or opinions are rejected. If human life was strictly rational, weed be likely to feel blank when disagreed with, or perhaps worried a suboptimal decision was being made. We might even feel pleased about it, taking the disagreement as a signal of the group's rigour.
But when our attempts at influence fail - especially in public, especially in the witness of higher-status players - we can become preoccupied, livid, bitter and vengeful. When this happens, we often slip into a more primitive mode of play in which status is not earned in displays of usefulness, but grabbed in acts of dominance. P54/55

They propose four preconditions for an episode to count as humiliating.
Firstly, we should believe, as most of us do, that we're deserving of status. Secondly, humiliating incidents are public. Thirdly, the person doing the degrading must themselves have some modicum of status. And finally, the stinger: the 'rejection of the status to claim status'. Or, from our perspective, rejection from the status game entirely. P67

In severe states of humiliation, we tumble so spectacularly down the rankings that we're no longer considered a useful co-player. So we're gone, exiled, cancelled. Connection to our kin is severed. 'The critical nature of this element is hard to overstate,' they write. 'When humiliation annuls the status of individuals to claim status, they are in essence denied eligibility to recover the status they have lost.' If humans are players, programmed to seek connection and status, humiliation insults both our deepest needs. And there's nothing we can do about it. 'They have effectively lost the voice to make claims within the relevant community and especially to make counterclaims on their own behalf to remove their humiliation.' The only way to recover is to find a new game even if that means rebuilding an entire life and self. Many humiliated individuals find it necessary to move to another community to recover their status, or more broadly, to reconstruct their lives.'
But there is one other option. An African proverb says, 'the child who is not embraced by the village will burn it down to feel its warmth'. If the game rejects you, you can return in dominance as a vengeful God, using deadly violence to force the game to attend to you in humility. The life's work of Professor Gilligan led him to conclude the fundamental cause of most human violence is the 'wish to ward off or eliminate the feeling of shame and humiliation and replace it with its opposite, the feeling of pride. P67

Social media is a status game. It can't not be: it's human life, unfolding online. It's all there, the success games of the selfie-takers and humble-braggers; the virtue games of the wellness gurus and political campaigners; the dominance games of the mobbers and the cancellers. P83

The model said a person is compelled to act when three forces collide in a moment: motivation (we must want the thing); trigger (something must happen to trigger a desire to get more of it) and ability (it must be easy). Take LinkedIn. At its launch, it visually represented the size of a user's professional network with a hub-and-spoke icon. The bigger the icon, the greater the status. People want status (that's the motivation), the icon generates a sudden urge to get more (that's the trigger) and LinkedIn provides an easy solution, in the use of the site to generate more connections (that's ability). 'Even though at the time there was nothing useful you could do with LinkedIn, that simple icon had a powerful effect in tapping into people's desire not to look like losers,' Fogg has said. P86

He described a way of issuing rewards such that they'd encourage compulsive behaviours. If a programmer wanted to create a certain action, in a user, they should offer a symbol of reinforcement after they'd performed the desired 'target behaviour'. But here was the trick: the positive reinforcement would be inconsistent. You wouldn't always know what you were going to get. 'To strengthen an existing behaviour, reinforcers are most effective when they are unpredict-able, Fogg wrote in 2003. 'Playing slot machines is a good example: Winning a payoff of quarters streaming into a metal tray is a rein-forcer, but it is random. This type of unpredictable reward schedule makes the target behaviour - in this case, gambling - very compel-ling, even addictive.' P86

It's not clear the technologists are fully aware what their users are actually gambling with. Social media is a slot machine for status. This is what makes it so obsessively compelling.
Every time we post a photo, video or a comment, we're judged.
We await replies, likes or upvotes and, just as a gambler never knows how the slot machine will pay out, we don't know what reward we'll receive for our contribution. Will we go up? Will we go down? The great prize changes every time. This variation creates compulsion. We just want to keep playing, again and again, to see what we'll get. P87

Sociologist Professor Cecilia Ridgeway describes experiments that tried to locate the point at which our need for status, once acquired, stabilises. 'There was no point at which preference for higher status levelled off,' she writes. The researchers thought one reason the desire for status is 'never really satiated' is because 'it can never really be possessed by the individual once and for all. Since it is esteem given by others, it can always, at least theo-retically, be taken away?' So we keep wanting more. And more and more and more. P90

One recalled,
'the swell of people, the requests, the letters, the emails, the greetings on the street, the people in cars, the honking of the horns, the screaming of your name... it starts to build and build like a small tornado, and it's coming at you, and coming at you.' Out of nowhere,
'you're worth something. You're important.'
Then comes the brain-story that says they've earned it. 'My life is different in that people kiss my ass and that's not always a good thing because then you start believing that your ass is worthy of being kissed,' said another. 'You have to constantly stay on guard for that. And I think it's very hard. There are times when I exploit that. I take advantage of people sucking up to me, or the power that I wield.' As overwhelming as it is, it's not enough. It's never enough.
Said another, T've been addicted to almost every substance known to man and the most addicting of them all is fame.' P95

T've lost friends... they feel inferior...
You're special and they aren't. The next thing you know, they'd really rather not have anything to do with you? Some superstars expressed disillusionment with the game. But it wasn't the status itself that was the problem. Rather they weren't getting the right kind of status: they had plenty of the success variety, now they wanted status for their virtue. 'You find out there are millions of people who like you for what you do. They couldn't care less who you are.' The flaw is a component of the dream we weave around reality.
It's a quirk in our cognition that keeps us in the game and playing.
If there's any consolation in these stories it's that, paradoxically, it's something of a leveller. The elites, so far above us, will never find what they're looking for. No matter who we are or how high on the scoreboard we climb, life is a game that never ends. P96

Humans aren't heroes on wondrous journeys of progress, we're players programmed for games. To succeed in these games, we seek high-status allies. When we find them, our copy-flatter-conform circuitry switches on. We mimic not just their behaviour but their beliefs. The better we believe, the higher we rise. And so faith, not truth, is incentivised. It's by this process that we come upon many of our most deeply held convictions. It can feel like we choose our beliefs as a cook chooses a recipe, carefully considering an array of options before making a selection. But usually, we believe what our groups believe, obediently copying the perceptions of our elites and accepting the world as they define it. This is how status games are played and how human culture has to work. We can't be expected to test for ourselves every fact on which we have to rely, so instead we look upwards for guidance. We have faith. We believe. And sometimes we end up believing crazy things. P130/131

Maranda was seduced into irrationality by a coalition of high-status Moms who pulled her into their dream of life with their rewards of the great prize. She became possessed by the game, evangelising it to all who knew her, risking her baby's health. Her desire to be a good mother came to depend on the belief that vaccines were harmful.
Achieving the former meant believing the latter, playing their game and winning, for my benefit, my child's benefit, the world's benefit.
Maranda was going to be an amazing Mom and she was going to help save the world. The status on offer was bountiful. When she turned her back and rebelled, she wasn't permitted to simply vanish.
They took the time to let her know: all that status she'd been awarded had been revoked. She was nobody. Worse than nobody. It would be better if she were dead. P135

Beliefs can become sacred too. They frequently do. This is why our reasoning about our sacred beliefs can become so impaired.
When a group of people make something sacred,' writes the psychologist Professor Jonathan Haidt, they lose the ability to think clearly about it. Beliefs are like my Mötley Crüe T-shirt, only infinitely more dangerous. P153

A game's command over its players strengthens when it flips into a mode of war. Connections between players tighten. These effects have been shown in numerous studies. An analysis of social ties between World War II veterans found individuals who experienced combat with one another maintained stronger personal connections even forty years later. Their bonds were intensified yet further if their units had suffered deaths, suggesting, the more intense the social threat, the greater the social bonding'. P167

A study of seventy million messages on the Chinese platform Weibo found the emotion that 'travelled fastest and farthest through the social network' was anger. Meanwhile, studies of mobbing events on Twitter find shamers increase their follower counts faster than non-shamers. P185

Cults are the tightest games of all. They maintain their power by being the sole significant source of connection and status for their players. Earning a place in a cult means actively following its belief system and adhering utterly to its game in thought and behaviour, allowing it to colonise your neural territory entirely. A true cult member has one active identity. Players attracted to them are often those who've failed at the games of conventional life. Alienated, injured and in need, their brains seek a game that seems to offer certainty, in which connection and status can be won by following an absolutely precise set of rules. P193

We seek rules and symbols by which to play a status game. When we find one that's suitable, and that feels right, we're vulnerable to absorbing its story, no matter how berserk. This is true of the Satan-hunters, the anti-vax mothers, the yam growers of Pohnpei, ISIS, the online mobbers and religious adherents world over. One Heaven's Gate veteran of thirteen years told researchers, We were protected.
We didn't like the rules of the world, so we created our own. It was a utopia. Brains want to know, who do I have to be to earn connection and status? Ti and Do wove a fantastic dream that offered precise instructions, telling them exactly who to change into. And so that's what they did. P199

A statusful woman or man who's leading a major game can certainly seem all-powerful when they're being cheered by hysterical crowds under blinding spotlights, gossiped about in world media and deferred to by platoons of acolytes. But the vision is deceptive: it's the subordinates who are ultimately in charge.
Leaders rent their thrones from these subordinates. If their formal position at the heights is to be assured, and they're to remain comfortable behind their giant desk, they must earn true status in the minds of their players. This means succeeding in the grind of making status for the group, and distributing it down through the hierarchy in ways that generally adhere to its rules. It might come in the form of titles or money or medals. P201

There's a critical warning in all this: tyrants often start by telling you what you already believe. When they arrive, they weave their irresistible self-serving dream, promising that you deserve more status, just as you'd always suspected, and pointing accusingly at those you'd already figured to be your enemies - child abusers, conversos, big business, Communists, Jews. They make accusation and gossip; you become angry, enthusiastic and morally outraged.
You begin to play. Once they've got you, they tighten up. P211

WHEN A GAME becomes tight, so does the story it tells of the world. It looks at the hierarchy - at where it sits versus its rivals - and conjures a simplistic, self-serving, moralistic tale that explains how that hierarchy came to be. This story is always the same: we're the virtuous players, deserving of more, and those who block our path are evil. The story is seductive: it's what players want to believe. It becomes a source of status and of hope for more status, and of resentment - an almighty resentment, the rage of the gods that's aimed at the enemy. It is a sacred story. Everyone must believe it in every detail. As the cousins run rampant, threatening and enforcing, we can be swept into it, a leaf in the torrent. The narrative becomes more extreme and more deranged. But we keep believing. It feels so real. We're dreamers, and the dreams we dream are those of our games. We inhabit them. We enact them. And when dreams turn dark we become their nightmares. P217

Studies suggest religious belief doesn't fall upon populations as charismatic holy men ride into towns on pony-back and convert them en masse. Rather, it spreads through personal connections, as friends and family members convince those close to them to join. And it works: research on the effects of religious conversion finds the 'psychological and emotional condition of most converts improves' after joining. P228/229

The Christians conjured hell, which generated salvation anxiety, then presented their game as the only way to escape it. Similarly, New Left activists threaten hell by radically rewriting the terms by which accusations of bigotry can be made, lowering the bar such that mere whiteness or masculinity are signs of guilt. Having generated salvation anxiety, they present their movement as the sole available remedy. Hell's threat can only be escaped with conspicuous, zealous and highly correct play. P276

It's easy to forget we have status to give, that it costs nothing and it never runs out. Creating small moments of prestige means always seeking opportunities to use it. Allowing others to feel statusful makes it more likely they'll accept our influence. Whether we're asking a favour or issuing a task to a subordinate, it's advisable to resist even subtle markers of dominance, allowing them to reach the 'correct' decision without putting them under pressure. If they sense they've had no choice in the matter, they're robbed of the gift of feeling good about their action. How to go about this depends on the rules of your culture, and change especially as we move from West to East. But, researchers find, in individualist societies, 'evoking freedom' can have significant power to persuade. In one study, telling a stranger they were free to accept or refuse a request for money for bus fare increased compliance from 16 to 40 per cent. I suspect this is largely down to status: if someone feels coerced into doing the 'right thing, even if gently, they've only agreed out of dominance. This means the status isn't theirs to enjoy, it's with the player to whom they've deferred.
But if they believe they ve decided freely, they're not weak but virtuous and so able to rightfully enjoy their generosity's reward. P304

A status game is a conspiracy we join to make ourselves feel impor-tant. Once our basic survival needs have been met, and we're connected with others, what's left is the contest. And for what? It's not as if we can go to some bunker in the desert, unlock a steel box and find our status inside it. We can't take our status to bed and give it a kiss. We concoct it, as if by magic, out of those endless symbols: deference, influence, money, flattery, eye contact, clothing, jewellery, professional titles, measures of orange juice, left or right on the plane. We invest the years of our lives into projects that become of all-devouring importance. Up and down and up and down and up and down we go. As we live, we soar and fall, our victories ecstatic, our losses so grave we can be driven to suicide, the bitterness of death seeming sweeter than failure. P309