# The Cold Start Problem

Author: Andrew Chen
Publication Date: 2021
Year Read: 2024

A telephone without a connection at the other end of the line is not even a toy or a scientific instrument. It is one of the most useless things in the world. Its value depends on the connection with the other telephone and increases with the number of connections. P20

the form of "networked product"-but the distinction is important. A successful network effect requires both a product and its network, and that was true in the age of the American Telephone & Telegraph Company, and true today. For Uber, the "product" is the app that people run on their phones, and the "network" refers to all the active users at any given time who are connecting with Uber to drive or ride. In contemporary parlance, the product is typically made of software whereas the network is typically made of people. P20

Anti-network effects are the negative force that drives new networks to zero. While the industry tends to focus on the positive results of network effects, at their inception, network effects are a destructive force, driven by a vicious—not virtuous—cycle where new users churn because not enough other users are there yet. For Slack, it doesn't make sense to use the product until your colleagues are also on the platform. For Uber, you can't use the service until there are enough drivers, who won't drive until there are enough rides. This first stage of creating a network is the hardest, and some will call it a "chicken and egg" situation or needing to "bootstrap" a community. I call it the "Cold Start Problem." P63

Solving the Cold Start Problem requires a team to launch a network and quickly create enough density and breadth such that the user e. perience can improve in leaps and bounds. In Slack's case, you can think of it as how likely it is that the person you're looking for within your company uses Slack, and how likely it is they'll reply. If the network is small and sparse, you may not be able to message who you want, or when you do, because they use it infrequently, they won't reply quickly. Your coworker will just wonder why you didn't send them an email.

If you add more people, but add the wrong people, then it still won't be enough. You need the right people on the network. Ten people using Slack all from the same team is better than ten random people in a larger company. Density and interconnectedness is key. P68

The concept of an atomic network is immediately obvious here. Although Bank of America served all of California, they didn't focus on trying to launch across the entire state at once, but rather, they focused on Fresno, a town where they had a high degree of penetration. On top of that, they focused on a moment in time-Bank of America issued all the credit cards on the same day, so that there would be a tipping point of people with the cards in their wallets, ready to use them. And after getting the cards in the hands of consumers, they focused on a specific segment of small merchants in the downtown corridor of the town, To complete the other side of the network. P73

Whether for credit cards, multiplayer games, or business collaboration. software, the "atomic network" is the smallest network needed that can stand on its own. It needs to have enough density and stability to break through early anti-network effects, and ultimately grow on its own. I liken it to an atom because it is the unit upon which larger networks are ultimately built. If you can build one, and then another, you can build the rest of the network—this is the base unit to build everything else. P74

Whereas our typical business verbiage revolves around aggregations of millions of people — that’s usually what we mean when we talk about "markets," "segments," and "demographics" —the language of launch. ing new networks should be focused on groupings of a handful of peo-ple, with the right intent, in the right situation, at the right time. This is true in dating apps, marketplaces, but even in workplace products. The wedge begins with "The Q2 planning cycle in the Product team at
Chase Bank." P78

Why is there a hard side at all? Hard sides exist because there are tasks in any networked product that just require more work, whether that's selling products, organizing projects, or creating content. Users on the hard side have complex workflows, expect status benefits as well as financial outcomes, and will try competitive products to compare. As a result, their expectations are higher, and it's difficult to engage and retain them. P84

In Spiegel's pyramid, people have emotional needs—whether that's self-expression, status, or communication-and create different forms of content to achieve them. Sending an ephemeral photo is easy, particularly a selfie on the go, which anyone can do. But spending hours to learn a new TikTok dance is difficult, and not everyone can do it. The more difficult the work needed to be part of the hard side of a network, the smaller the percentage of users who will participate. P87

The key insight in the stories of Homobiles or Tinder is—how do you find a problem where the hard side of a network is engaged, but their needs are unaddressed? The answer is to look at hobbies and side hustles. P96

The idea is to start with these underserved segments—whose users may not be very attractive customers on their own—and to apply Clayton Christensen's disruption theory. New products often disrupt markets by starting on the low end, providing "good enough" func-tionality, and growing from there into the medium, and eventually into the core market of the incumbents. Recently, the opposite trend has emerged—products like Uber and email company Superhuman, have started at the top of the market as a luxury product, and worked their way down. P97

Networked products are fundamentally different from the typical product experience—they facilitate experiences that users have with each other, whereas traditional products emphasize how users interact with the software itself. They grow and succeed by adding more users, which create network effects, whereas traditional products grow by building better features and supporting more use cases. It's why products like Twitter and Zoom and others often seem so simple, and are critiqued as "features not products" that seem trivial at first. They have one magical core experience. Contrast this to traditional products, which often win the "checkmark contest" bake-offs common in enterprise software purchases, but lose in the contest of actual product engagement from their end users. P103

many early investors balked at the fact that Zoom was tackling what they perceived as a solved problem. The commonality between all these networked products is that they offered novel ways for people to interact, and over time, the network became the defensibility.
In other words, the ideal product to drive network effects combines both factors: The product idea itself should be as simple as possible-easily understandable by anyone as soon as they encounter it. And at the same time, it should simultaneously bring together a rich, complex, infinite network of users that is impossible to copy by competitors.
Zoom, of course, is a fantastic example of this ideal. P106

This is a recurring theme across business models because of the Cold Start Problem. Charging customers directly is a straightforward way to generate revenue, but it adds friction for every new user to join the network. It's hard enough to build an atomic network; why make it even harder by erecting barriers? Without being able to build out a network quickly, growth channels like virality are more muted. If Zoom charged every user with no free tier, it might have generated more revenue in the short run, but would likely have needed to spend more on marketing and sales to compensate. Freemium is an essential part of Zoom's appeal and ability to grow.
And once Zoom had the right ingredients —a simple, killer product-its business model then provided the revenue and business model to leverage viral growth. P108

It becomes obvious when a product has solved the Cold Start Problem-the experience starts to really work. When you open a workplace collaboration app during a meeting, all the relevant tasks are in there, and your coworkers are chatting away about next steps. Or when you open a social app, engaging and entertaining content is there on your feed.
You have notifications because your friends have already commented on your new photos. A marketplace app might start to feel like it has every-thing, like it's fully comprehensive. Search for any product, and dozens of relevant listings show, and they're cheap, high quality, and shippable same day.
When the network is fully filled out, active, and people are connected in the right way, then the product experience can really shine. This is the Magic Moment, when a product can deliver its core value —whether that's connecting people for work, entertainment, dating, games, or otherwise. A product that hasn't yet solved its Cold Start Problem will fail to deliver any magic in its early days. P111

The Magic Moment is a nice concept, but it would be even more useful if you could measure it. The way to best do this might be surprising-you start with the opposite of magic, the moments where the network has broken down, and you start solving the problem from there. P116

Gmail first launched as an invite-only product on April Fool's in
2004. It offered a gigabyte of storage at a time when others were offering megabytes of storage. The original idea wasn't to create hype, but rather something more practical-the infrastructure running Gmail couldn't support a fast ramp on the number of users, so an invite-only strategy was utilized:
Gmail ended up running on three hundred old Pentium III computers nobody else at Google wanted. That was sufficient for the limited beta rollout the company planned, which involved giving accounts to a thousand outsiders, allowing them to invite a couple of friends apiece, and growing slowly from there?
However, it soon became clear the product was going to be a hit-George Harik, one of the first ten employees at Google said:
Once it was clear that Gmail was the real deal, the invitations became a hot property. The limited rollout had been born of neces-sity, but " it had a side effect. Everyone wanted it even more. It was hailed as one of the best marketing decisions in tech history, but it was a little bit unintentional."
People began to buy and sell invites to Gmail:
Bidding for invites on eBay sent prices shooting up to $150 and be-yond; sites such as Gmail Swap emerged to match up those with invites with those who desperately wanted them. Having a Hotmail or Yahoo Mail email address was slightly embarrassing; having a Gmail one meant that you were part of a club most people couldn't get into.
It might seem silly to fight for early access, but there are permanent benefits for getting on in the first few months. Earlier users could grab the username that they wanted. An address like [frank@gmail.com](mailto:frank@gmail.com). P137

Invite-only is a powerful strategy. When executed well, the people in an initial atomic network become a magnet for even more users. allows a network to copy and paste itself many times over, attracting more and more adjacent networks over time.
Just as creators of new products spend endless hours designing the experience, creators of networked products have an additional task: curating the right people so that the experience of a new member joining the community, marketplace, or other network is just right. A good product designer wouldn't allow a random set of feature ideas to be added to the final version of a new app, and in the same way, a mindful designer of networks wouldn't allow a random set of users to initially join. Had LinkedIn started with an undesirable set of users, it likely would not have become a magnet for the true believers that continued to onboard their friends over time. Had Tinder begun somewhere besides USC—let's say in a small rural town —it wouldn't have been able to build campus to campus, and then large cities and then on from there. It would have changed the whole strategy. For networked products, the curation of the network-who's on it, why they're there, and how they interact with each other-is as important as its product design. Starting with a deliberate point of view on who's best for your network will define its magnetism, culture, and ultimate trajectory. P140

A popular strategy for bootstrapping networks is what I like to call "come for the tool, stay for the network." The idea is to initially attract users with a single-player tool and then, over time, get them to participate in a network. The tool helps get to initial critical mass. The network creates the long term value for users, and defensibility for the company. P145

The levers you use to increase the engagement of an infrequent user are different than deepening engagement for a power user. Early users might just need a few more connections to colleagues at their company. Power users might need to discover advanced features on search, recruiting, and creating groups, so that they have new and more powerful ways to connect with people. Segmenting our users gives us the granularity to connect the right features and user education to impact their usage. P203

In Dropbox's case, this segmentation revealed that a user who has installed the product across multiple devices- home and work compu ers, or on their mobile devices—is more valuable than someone who jus has a single device and uses the service for backup. Better yet, high-mahe users often share folders and collaborate with other users, particular for work purposes. As I described earlier, Dropbox segmented their us ers by value-High-Value Actives and Low-Value Actives, as opposed to LinkedIn's frequency-oriented segmentation. To encourage users to take these high-value actions, Dropbox could improve the functionality of syncing and sharing. It could send or show educational content, showing users the fastest way to get set up on multiple devices. Or it could use incentives - free storage, for instance-to compel users to properly set up their accounts. P204

Conceptualizing network effects in this manner helps us understand why the Cold Start Problem exists, from a user's point of view. If the network is too sparse, the loop is broken—not enough users will see a photo to reply with likes, and not enough buyers will see a listing to purchase a product. If a loop is broken, then the user churns, which further cascades the network problem. Users need to trust the loop to rely on it. If the network is too small or too inactive and the loop breaks, then users will be less likely to use it in the future. After all, if you text a friend on a new messaging app and they don't respond, or if you share a document at work but don't get a reply, then trust goes down. But in the positive case, if a network scales and the connections get denser, then the loop gets tighter —content creators get more social feedback, marketplace sellers get more purchases at higher prices, and users of workplace tools can effectively collaborate with their coworkers. P205

The Engagement network effect has the superpower of being able to reactivate churned users, which in turn grows the active user count. Based on data I've seen from startups, a typical product might only have 25-50 percent of its registered users active in any given month, expressed as a ratio of actives divided by signups. In other words, up to 75 percent of users are inactive at any given point, most of whom will never come back. The ability to reactivate users provides a powerful counterweight to churn, keeping this ratio in check over time. This is an important tool that is unique to networked products. Traditional products that lack networks often struggle with this, because they rely on spammy emails, discounts, and push notifications to entice users back. This usually doesn't work, and company-sent communications rank among the lowest clickthrough rate messages. Networked products, on the other hand, have the unique capability to reactivate these users by enlisting active users to bring them back. Even if you don't open the app on a given day, other users in the network may incar-act with you-commenting or liking your past content, or sending you a message. Getting an email notification that says your boss just shared a folder with you is a lot more compelling than a marketing message. A notification that a close friend just joined an app you tried a month ago is a lot more engaging than an announcement about new features. And the more dense the network is around a chumed user, the more likely they are to receive this type of interaction. p206/207

When teams are asked to improve their product's retention rate, they often think that the answer will lie in some magical product improve-ment. The Engagement network effect, and its underlying loops, provide a systematic way to tackle the problem.
The early work on scurvy gave us the foundational tools. But instead of providing citrus and measuring for malnutrition, tech companies can reason by analogy: create user cohorts by levels of engagement, and analyze what differentiates high value users from lower value ones. These start out as correlations, so use A/B testing to prove causality-once the best levers are found, test many variations of these ideas. Rinse and repeat, to systematically strengthen the Engagement network effect. The good news is that the Engagement Effect will automatically kick in as colleagues, influencers, and other people join the network But getting these people onboard can be its own challenge. P208 

Networked products are unique because they can embed their viral growth into the product experience itself. When a product like Dropbox has a built-in feature like folder sharing, it can spread on its own. PayPal's badges and core user-to-user payments accomplishes the same. This is the Product/Network Duo at work again, where the product has features to attract people to the network, while the network brings more value to the product. Workplace collaboration products like Slack ask you to invite your colleagues into your chat, and photo-sharing apps like Instagram make it easy to invite and connect to your Facebook friends. They can tap into your phone's contacts, integrate with your company's internal employee directory, or tap into the sharing widgets built into your phone. This is software, not just building a buzzy, shareable video. P213/214

At the same time this is happening, the network itself is changing.
As a network grows, often the hard side of the network gets even more concentrated and powerful, and begins to act accordingly. Uber's power drivers are its most important users, and the company faced a tough situation when they came together to demand higher pay, benefits, and other changes. As I describe in "When the Network Revolts," it becomes incredibly hard to keep everyone happy.
While the hard side evolves, the rest of the network is changing as well. Early communities are often special, curated and molded to share attractive norms and qualities. Slack launched to a market of leading startups for a reason, as did Tinder with their college-by-college strat-egy. As I describe in "Eternal September," there's an unfortunate downside in reaching a more mainstream audience: more and more people jump in, and what makes the early community special often gets diluted. P241

New products initially grow just by adding more customers— to grow a network, add more nodes. Eventually this stops working because nearly everyone in the target market has joined the network, and there are not enough potential customers left. From here, the focus has to shift from adding new customers to layering on more services and revenue opportunities with existing ones. P253

In my conversations with Bangaly on this topic, he described his approach as a systematic evaluation of the network of networks that constituted Instagram. Rather than focusing on the core network of Power Users-the loud and vocal minority that often drive product decisions-instead the approach was to constantly figure out the adjacent set of users whose experience was subpar.
There might be multiple sets of nonfunctional adjacent networks at any given time, and it might require different approaches to fix each one. For some networks, it might be the features of the product, like Instagram not having great support for low-end Android apps. Or it might be because of the quality of their networks- if the right content creators or celebrities hadn't yet arrived. You fix the experience for these users, then ask yourself again, who are the adjacent users? P258

The Law of Shitty Clickthroughs says every marketing channel degrades over time. This means lower clickthrough, engagement, and conversion rates, regardless of if you're talking about email, paid marketing, social media, or video. This is a core reason why products hit growth ceilings-when marketing channels stop performing, the growth curve starts to bend downward. p265

The same can be found for nearly all growth channels over time. At the micro level, an individual marketing campaign will typically see declining clickthrough rates over time—so teams have to refresh the mes-saging, images, and channels. At a more macro level, channels like email or paid marketing degrade over years, though some channels fall even quicker-like the Zynga + Facebook platform era of the 2010s, which dropped off in months, not years. Why does this happen? Consumers acclimate to specific brands, marketing techniques, and messaging, and tune them out. P267

When Wimdu launched, the Samwers reached out to Airbnb to discuss combining forces, as they had done with Groupon and eBay to facilitate a speedy exit. Discussions ensued between Airbnb and Wimdu cofounders and investors-meeting multiple times, touring the Widu offices, and checking with other founders like Andrew Mason from Groupon to best understand the potential outcome. In the end, Airbnb chose to fight. Brian Chesky described his thought process:

“My view was, my biggest punishment, my biggest revenge on you is, I'm gonna make you run this company long term. So you had the baby, now you gotta raise the child. And you're stuck with it for 18 years. Because I knew he wanted to sell the company.
I knew he could move faster than me for a year, but he wasn't gonna keep doing it. And so that was our strategy. And we built the company long term. And the ultimate way we won is, we had a better community. He couldn't understand community. And I think we had a better product.” P316

This happens because networked products can lean toward "win. ner take all. When one product emerges as the winner in an atomic network, tha's just the group choosing their favorite app. But repeat that enough times, and that becomes the playbook for a product to win across the entire market—and that's a monopoly. This happens because within an atomic network of users, whether they are friends or colleagues, it's common to standardize on a single product for conve-nience. For example, within the workplace, a team and sometimes an entire company will converge on the same set of products. They will use the same collaboration tools to store important documents, message coworkers, or edit spreadsheets. A single app in each category tends to receive the lion's share of engagement, so that the team that uses Slack will not spend an equal amount of time in Microsoft Teams as well-it's usually one or the other. One product eventually dominates, at least within that particular network.
If a networked product can begin to win over a series of networks faster than its competition, then it develops an accumulating advantage.
These advantages, naturally, manifest as increasing network effects across customer acquisition, engagement, and monetization. Smaller networks might unravel and lose their users, who might switch over. Naturally, it becomes important for every player to figure out how to compete in this type of high-stakes environment. But how does the competitive playbook work in a world with network effects?
First, I'll tell you what it's not: it's certainly not a contest to see who can ship more features. In fact, sometimes the products seem roughly the same. P324

When examined through the lens of Meerkat's Law and the central framework of this book, it is obvious why the resulting networks generated by big launches are weak. You'd rather have a smaller set of atomic networks that are denser and more engaged than a large number of networks that aren't there. When a networked product depends on having other people in order to be useful, it's better to ignore the top-line aggregate numbers. Instead, the quality of the traction can only be seen when you zoom all the way into the perspective of an individual user within the network. Does a new person who joins the product see value based on how many other users are already on it? You might as well ignore the aggregate numbers, and in particular the spike of users that a new product might see in its first days. As Eric Ries describes in his book The Lean Startup, these are "vanity metrics." The numbers might make you feel good, especially when they are going up, but it doesn't matter if you have a hundred million users if they are churning out at a high rate, due to a lack of other users engaging. P343

When networks are built bottom-up, they are more likely to be densely interconnected, and thus healthier and more engaged. There are multiple reasons for this: A new product is often incubated within a subcommunity, whether that's a college campus, San Francisco techies, gamers, or freelancers- as recent tech successes have shown. It will grow within this group before spreading into other verticals, allowing time for its developers to tune features like inviting or sharing, while honing the core value proposition. Once a new networked product is spreading via word of mouth, then each user is likely to know at least one other user already on the network. By the time it reaches the broader con-sciousness, it will be seen as a phenomenon, and top-down efforts can always be added on to scale a network that's already big and engaged. P344