# The Culture Code

Author: Clotaire Rapaille
Publication Date: 2006
Year Read: 2025

<aside>
💡

Methodology:

The first;

The most powerful;

The most recent memory 

</aside>

When I put groups of consumers together, I asked them different questions. 

> I didn't ask them what they wanted in a Jeep; l asked them to tell me about their earliest memories of Jeeps. Respondents told me hundreds of stories, and the stories had a strong recurring image-of being out on the open land, of going where no ordinary car could go, of riding free of the restraints of the road. Many people spoke of the American West or the open plains. I retuned to those wary Chrysler executives and told them that the Code for Jeep in America is HORSE.
> 

Their notion of turning the Wrangler into just another SUV was ill advised. SUVs are not horses.
Horses don't have luxury appointments. Horses don't have butter-soft leather, but rather the tough leather of a saddle. The Wrangler needed to have removable doors and an open top because drivers wanted to feel the wind around them, as though they were riding on a horse.
The executives weren't particularly moved. After all, they had vast research that told them consumers said they wanted something else.
Maybe people once thought of Jeeps as horses, but they didn't want to think of them that way any longer. I asked them to test my theory by making a relatively minor adjustment to the car's design: replacing the square headlights with round ones. Why? Because horses have round eyes, not square ones.
When it turned out that it was cheaper to build the car with round headlights, the decision became easier for them to make. They tested the new design and the response was instantly positive. Wrangler sales rose and the new "face" of the Wrangler became its most prominent and marketable feature. In fact, the car's logo has incorporated its grille and round headlights ever since. P2

The Culture Code is the unconscious meaning we apply to any given thing—a car, a type of food, a relationship, even a country-via the culture in which we are raised. The American experience with Jeeps is very different from the French and German experience because our cultures evolved differently (we have strong cultural memories of the open frontier; the French and Germans have strong cultural memories of occupation and wat). Therefore, the Codes-the meanings we give to the Jeep at an unconscious level-are different as well.
The reasons for this are numerous (and I will describe them in the next chapter), but it all comes down to the worlds in which we grew up. It is obvious to everyone that cultures are different from one an-other. What most people don't realize, however, is that these differences actually lead to our processing the same information in different ways. P5/6

My journey toward the discovery of cultural codes began in the early 1970s. I was a psychoanalyst in Paris at the time, and my clinical work brought me to the research of the great scientist Henri Laborit, who drew a clear connection between learning and emotion, showing that without the latter the former was impossible. The stronger the emotion, the more clearly an experience is learned.
Think of a child told by his parents to avoid a hot pan on a stove. This concept is abstract to the child until he reaches out, touches the pan, and it burns him. In this intensely emotional moment of pain, the child learns what "hot" and "burn" mean and is very unlikely ever to forget it.
The combination of the experience and its accompanying emotion creates something known widely as an imprint, a term first applied by Konrad Lorenz. Once an imprint occurs, it strongly conditions our thought processes and shapes our future actions. Each imprint helps make us more of who we are. The combination of imprints defines us. P6

While the Japanese had an extremely strong emotional connection to tea (something I learned without asking in the first hour of the ses-sions), they had, at the most, a very superficial imprint of coffee.
Most, in fact, had no imprint of coffee at all.
Under these circumstances, Nestle's strategy of getting these consumers to switch from tea to coffee could only fail. Coffee could not compete with tea in the Japanese culture if it had such weak emotional resonance. Instead, if Nestlé was going to have any success in this market at all, they needed to start at the beginning. They needed to give the product meaning in this culture. They needed to create an imprint for coffee for the Japanese.
Armed with this information, Nestlé devised a new strategy. Rather than selling instant coffee to a country dedicated to tea, they created desserts for children infused with the flavor of coffee but without the caffeine. The younger generation embraced these desserts. Their first imprint of coffee was a very positive one, one they would carry throughout their lives. Through this, Nestlé gained a meaningful foothold in the Japanese market. While no marketer will likely ever be able to convince the Japanese to abandon tea, coffee sales—-nearly nonexistent in 1970—now approach half a billion pounds per year in Japan. Understanding the process of imprinting-and how it related directly to Nestlé's marketing efforts-unlocked a door to the Japanese culture for them and turned around a floundering business venture. P9

An imprint and its Code are like a lock and its combination. If you have all of the right numbers in the right sequence, you can open the lock. Doing so over a vast array of imprints has profound implica-tions. It brings us to the answer to one of our most fundamental ques-tions: why do we act the way we do? Understanding the Culture Code provides us with a remarkable new tool—a new set of glasses, if you will, with which to view ourselves and our behaviors. It changes the way we see everything around us. What's more, it confirms what we have always suspected is true-that, despite our common humanity, people around the world really are different. The Culture Code offers a way to understand how. P11

The discovery sessions for cars brought up some very strong emo-tions. People came to me after the third hour to say that memories brought them to tears, filled them with joy, or even made them extremely uncomfortable. This is not unusual. In fact, some form of this happens at nearly every discovery session I do even the ones for office products and toilet paper.
Emotions are the keys to learning, the keys to imprinting. The stronger the emotion, the more clearly the experience is learned.
Think again of that child and the hot pan. Emotions create a series of mental connections (I call them mental highways) that are reinforced by repetition. These mental highways condition us to see the world in predictable ways. They are the path from our experience with the world (such as touching a hot pan) to a useful approach to the world (avoiding all hot things in the future).
We do the overwhelming majority of our learning when we are children. By the time we are seven, most of our mental highways have been constructed. But emotion continues to provide us with new imprints throughout our lives. Most Americans of the Boomer generation can remember where they were and what they were doing when they learned of the assassination of John F. Kennedy. Most Americans alive today can vividly relive the experience of watching the World Trade Center towers fall. This is because these experiences are so emotionally powerful that they are effectively seared onto our brains.
We will never forget them, and the simple mention of the topic sends us back to that moment when we imprinted it. P17

One can tell the same story with either a sword or a tennis racket, which means that the content isn't essential to the meaning. You could say the same thing about West Side Story, whose "content" is different from Romeo and Juliet's but which tells the same tale. P20

When looking at why people act in certain ways or do certain things, we need to look past the content and into the structure. In any situation, there are three distinct structures in action. The first is the biological structure, the DNA. Monkeys, human beings, cows, and giraffes are made of the same content. However, each species is unique because the organization of its DNA-its structure--is unique. The next structure is the culture. All cultures have a language, an art, a habitat, a history, and so on; the way all these elements, this con-tent, is organized creates the unique identity of each culture.
The final structure is the individual. Within the DNA that makes us human there is an infinite variety. Further, each of us has a unique relationship with our parents, siblings, and family that shapes our individual mental scripts and creates our unique identity. Even identical twins end up with unique identities. One was born first, the other second. They are never going to be at exactly the same place at the same time, and, little by little, they will start developing different perspectives on the world. They begin with the same content but develop different structures. P20/21

Even our most arbitrary actions are the result of the trips we take down our mental highways. We take these trips hundreds of times a day, making decisions about what to wear, what to eat, where to go, what to say in conversation, and so on. What most people don't real-ize, however, is that there is a Code required to make these journeys.
Think of the Code as a combination that unlocks a door. In this case, we need nor only to punch in the numbers, but also to punch them in in a specific order, at a specific speed, with a specific rhythm, etc.
Every word, every action, and every symbol has a Code. Our brains supply these Codes subconsciously, but there is a way to discover them, to understand why we do the things we do. P24

These messages vary greatly from culture to culture, and, therefore, so do the Codes. For example, I conducted discovery sessions about cheese in France and in America. The Codes we uncovered could not have been more different. The French Code for cheese is ALIVE.
This makes perfect sense when one considers how the French choose and store cheese. They go to a cheese shop and poke and prod the cheeses, smelling them to learn their ages. When they choose one, they take it home and store it at room temperature in a cloche (a bell. shaped cover with little holes to allow air in and keep insects out).
The American Code for cheese, on the other hand, is DEAD. Again, this makes sense in context. Americans "kill" their cheese through pasteurization (unpasteurized cheeses are not allowed into this coun try, select bunks of cheese that have been prewrapped-mummified, i you will-in plastic (like body bags), and store it, still wrapped air-tight, in a morgue also known as a refrigerator. P25

We can return one more time to our example of the PT Cruiser to show how these different cultural Codes affect our responses to things. My review of hundreds of stories told by participants during the discovery sessions revealed that the American Code for cars is IDENTITY. Americans want cars that are distinctive, that will not be mistaken for any other kind of car on the road, and that trigger memories of Sunday drives, the freedom of getting behind the wheel for the first time, and the excitement of youthful passion. A car with a strong identity, such as the PT Cruiser or, as I illustrated earlier, the Jeep Wrangler, has a much better chance of breakout sales than a cookie-cutter sedan. P26

By avoiding the Code for seduction in their advertising, L'Oréal created a winning strategy. They went "productively off Code." When an advertiser knows that associating a product with a certain Code will trigger negative feelings, it can choose to sidestep that Code com-pletely. Another approach, particularly useful when a negative association is unavoidable (as we will see later with the Code for alcohol), is to subtly acknowledge the Code in such a way as to lessen its impact. This latter strategy is useful to any individual attempting to be seductive. After all, there is no way to avoid engaging in seduction unless one is resigned to celibacy. A useful tool here is disarming hon-esty—-letting the object of one's affection know of one's interest directly to avoid any sense of trickery or manipulation. The negative Code is still there, but the honesty-—the unstated acknowledgment of the Code-will blunt its force. P49

When I read what people write during discovery sessions, I look not at what they say (remember, you can't believe what people say), but at the common messages. I don't look at the context, but at the grammar. Not the content, but the structure. In doing this with the pieces people wrote about sex, I noticed something in the cadence of the writing; in the regular appearance of words like "scared," "scary," and "anxious" and of phrases like "I felt beaten up" or "I wondered how I would make it"; in the use of clipped sentences and a certain breathlessness in the tone. It brought to mind confrontation, but not the kind of confrontation that is resolved peacefully, with both sides coming away winners. Rather, it brought to mind the kind of confrontation that always has at least one loser and often two. A violent confrontation.
In fact, the American Culture Code for sex is VIOLENCE. P51

Life is tension. Everything we experience in life lies somewhere on an axis between two extremes. One cannot truly know pleasure without knowing pain. One cannot legitimately feel joy without having felt sorrow. The degree to which we feel an experience depends on where that experience lies on the axis (a little painful, overwhelmingly joyful, and so on). The same system that communicates pain to your brain also communicates pleasure, as every sadomasochist already knows.
Similar tensions define cultures. Every culture is composed of an endless number of archetypes and of the tensions between each archetype and an opposing one. For example, one of the primary tensions in the American culture is the one between freedom and prohibition. We consider freedom an inalienable right. We have fought numerous wars to protect it, and our citizens are willing to die to maintain it. At the same time, however, our culture is very strongly inclined toward prohibition. We believe we shouldn't drink too much, play too much, or exhibit too much wealth. While the axis itself never changes, where a culture stands on a particular axis varies from era to era. P55

One can trace the distinctive evolution of each culture on the planet to the survival needs of that culture.
Thus, we find the Codes for the elements of a culture when we understand how our reptilian brains address that element. This process is especially clear when we look at the Code most closely related to survival—-health—and the Code for youth. P74

every species is distinguished by the structure of its DNA. I call this the biological scheme. In addition, every culture has a cultural scheme that is an extension of the biological scheme. The biological scheme identifies a need, and the cultural scheme interprets it within the parameters of a particular culture. "Isomorphism," a term borrowed from biology, chemistry, and mathematics, is commonly applied to the continuum berween the biological scheme and the cultural scheme.
For example, our human biological scheme dictates that our physical comfort peaks within a certain air temperature range. If the air is too hot, we become lethargic. If it is too cold, we run the risk of illness and, in the extreme, death. To address the heat issue, we developed air conditioning. Each culture, however, regards the use of air conditioning differently, depending on its cultural scheme. Americans consider air conditioning a necessity (virtually every car in America comes equipped with an air-conditioning system), while Europeans consider it a luxury (in the UK, air conditioning is not standard equipment even on a Rolls-Royce). I recall visiting a four star hotel in Germany a few summers ago. My room was very hot; when I asked the concierge to address the problem, he told me that the hotel didn't have air conditioning because the weather only got this hot one month a year. This might have been sensible from their perspective, but as an American, I found it uncomfortable. It had an unpleasant impact on my stay and I kept thinking that even a room in an inexpensive motel in the United States would have had a temperature more to my liking. The German hotel's policy was appropriate for the human biological scheme, but not for my American cultural scheme.
On the other hand, I regularly hear Europeans complain that American stores are too cold in the summer. Again, the conflict lies in the cultural schemes. Americans like to be cool, even extremely cool.
Research bas shown that the coldest stores in America tend to be the most expensive. Since air conditioning is a necessity, we need extreme air conditioning to convey a sense of luxury. Biological schemes are specific to each species, and are not nego-riable. We breathe with our mouths, noses, and lungs rather than with gills. These biological schemes pre-organize the way a Culture Code is created and evolves. They establish the parameters within which & particular culture can survive. A culture that spends some of its tme underwater can work. One that spends all of its time underwater can-not. As long as a culture acknowledges the limits of biology, however. it is free to roam within the parameters. We all need to cat, but the American culture created fast food while the French created slow food. Every species needs to reproduce itself, but some culture's employ polygamy (one man with several women) while others prefer polyandry (one woman with several men), These are cultural answer to the same biological scheme. P93/94

As we've established, a culture is a survival kit we inherit at birth. Our culture is what it is (and it changes very, very slowly) because it is best suited to the conditions under
which its members live. Because of this, attempts to impose changes that are fundamentally opposed to the Code of a particular culture are destined to fail. P130

nothing that contradicts the Code of a culture succeeds for any length of time. P140

When one seeks to bring something new to a culture, one must adapt the idea to the culture. It doesn't work the other way. P140

Alibis make us feel better about what we do because they feel logical and socially acceptable. Whenever I present a client with a Code, I also present him with an alibi or two gleaned from the discovery ses-sions. These are important to the client, because an effective marketing campaign needs to consider the alibis while addressing the Code.
For instance, a food packager who focused only on the effectiveness of the fuel in its product without also suggesting that the product tasted good would leave an important selling point unstated, Alibis address the "conventional wisdom" about an archetype, the kind of thing you are likely to hear in a focus group. While you can't believe what people say, it would be a mistake not to listen to it and incorporate it into your message. At a personal level, an alibi often has credibility even if it is not the reason why a person does what he does. Your schedule really might make it difficult for you to eat as well as you should. It isn't the reason you're fat, but once you address why you are checking out, you still need to come up with an eating plan that accommodates your hours. Just as companies need to consider both the Code and the al-ibi, so do individuals. Any long-held excuse has at least a modicum of validity. P155/156

Alibis help us to make sense of the messages the Codes send us. Few of us are aware enough of our motivations to understand that our excitement over that pending shopping trip comes from the reconnection that trip will provide. What we tell ourselves instead is that we need things—shoes for an upcoming social event, clothes for the kids' new school year, a new range before the old one stops working, a new car because the other one is coming off lease. Similarly, few of us acknowledge that we're buying "stripes" when we buy our luxury items. Instead, the car is for entertaining clients; the built-in swimming pool is for the children and their friends. Alibis work because they seem legitimate. They give us good reason to do things we want to do anyway. We can reconnect with life. We can exhibit our stripes. And our cortexes won't give us the least bit of trouble. P169

However, commerce can. Understanding that brands stand a far greater chance of succeeding globally when they emphasize their unique heritage (consider Starbucks, Mercedes, Sony, or any number of others) illuminates a fundamental link between culture and viability on the world stage. When a brand identifies itself with its culture, it underscores that culture's contribution to the world. These contri-butions— and the unspoken invitation to all cultures to contribute what they do best—make the concept of globalization not only palatable but also enviable.
A brand is more than a name or a product. A successful brand is an icon, a powerful expression of a cultural archetype. Therefore, brand managers are not just in charge of reinvesting in the emotional bank account of their brand, but are also in charge of a more important mission: to perpetuate the elements of character of a culture and therefore maintain cultural diversity in the world. In many ways, they are in charge of the Culture Code, in charge of communicating to the global community the power and fascination of culture. P205