# Understanding Fandom

Author: Mark Duffett
Publication Date: 2013
Year Read: 2025

Sports fandom remains the most accepted model for fandom in our society. Although a minority of researchers have studied both topics, in many ways sports fandom and media fandom are very different objects of study? Sports fandom is ultimately tribal and based on a controlled, competitive mentality.
It raises passionate instincts that are significantly different in both meaning and intensity to those associated with enjoying television, music or cinema. P3

Fandom is a sociocultural phenomenon largely associated with modern capitalist societies, electronic media, mass culture and public performance. In most research there is a tendency to talk about the phenomenon as if it has always existed, fully formed, in society. Some scholars have called for more research that historicizes fandom. As that issue is increasingly being addressed, writers have begun to unearth a complex history which demonstrates Henry Jenkins' claim that 'Nobody functions entirely within fan culture, nor does fan culture maintain any claims to self-sufficiency. There is nothing timeless and unchanging about this culture; fandom originates as a response to specific historical conditions' (1992, 3). Those conditions stem from shifts in the media and their tendency to reconfigure everyday experience. P5

In the middle of the 1960s the astounding popularity of the Beatles sparked a new wave of debate that tended to characterize their phenomenon as fan hysteria. Two other intriguing episodes in the history of Beatles fandom happened in the summer of 1966- when Americans learned that John Lennon had compared his group's popularity to that of Jesus - and October 1969 - when a false rumour took root that claimed Paul McCartney was dead!" Towards the end of the 1960s - partly in the wake of the band's influence - many young people 'dropped out' of society to form the counter-culture: a movement that mixed chemically-induced intoxication and enthusiasm for progressive rock with a commitment to civil rights and anti-war protest." The 500,000 young music enthusiasts who attended the Woodstock festival in 1969 shared a generational love of rock songs and alternative social values.
Within a few short years, however, arena rock bands were using spectacles of mass fandom to serve their own interests (see Waksman 2007). P10

Educated by non-linear media such as video games, film goers began to expect a different entertainment experience. By 1999 a range of media began to provide it. Transmedia storytelling is the process of telling different parts of the same story through different electronic media. The success of The Blair Witch Project Website and horror film in 1999 encouraged Hollywood to further invest in the process (103). Directors Andy and Lana Wachowski released The Matrix that year as the first episode in a three-part franchise that told its story across many different media outlets. Their trilogy ambiguously mixed elements of sci-fi, anime, futurology, religious analogy, social history and morality tale. It also made unprecedented - and for some unwelcome - demands on consumers (96). As video games became more like movies, Hollywood therefore began to differentiate itself again by encouraging fans to engage with extended versions of the text before visiting the cinema (106). In parallel, television shifted to emphasize the excitement of live broadcasting. P12

in the late 1980s and early 1990s, cultural scholars, myself included, depicted media fandom as an important test site for ideas about active consumption and grassroots creativity. We were drawn toward the idea of "fan culture" as operating in the shadows of, in response to, as well as an altemative to commercial culture. Fan culture was defined through the appropriation and transformation of materials borrowed from mass culture; it was the application of folk cultural practices to mass cultural content. P16

Objectivity is the idea that universally valid knowledge can be built from impartial investigation. No history can be completely objective; it is necessarily a limited and partial explanation. Francesca Coppa's (2007) otherwise excellent history of media fandom in relation to fan art, for example, tends to focus on US television shows. Every act of storytelling means not only making choices about what to keep in and leave out but also how to slant the evidence. Since no narrative can include every perspective at the same time, there is no such thing as a perfect overview. P17

Everyone knows what a 'fan' is. It's somebody who is obsessed with a particular star, celebrity, film, TV programme, band; somebody who can produce reams of information on the object of their fandom, can quote their favoured lines or lyrics, chapter and verse. Fans are highly articulate. Fans interpret media texts in a variety of interesting and perhaps unexpected ways. And fans participate in communal activities - they are not 'socially atomised' or isolated viewers/readers... So, how have 'fandom' and the media 'cult' been defined academically? To date, defining 'fandom' has been no easy task, despite (or perhaps because of) the 'everydayness' of the term. P18

The definition of fandom has some easy answers at first sight. Discussions have focused not just on the degree of audience involvement, but also on its quality (Cavicchi 1998, 39). A fan is a person with a relatively deep, positive emotional conviction about someone or something famous, usually expressed through a recognition of style or creativity. He/she is also a person driven to explore and participate in fannish practices. Fans find their identities wrapped up with the pleasures connected to popular culture. They inhabit social roles marked out as fandom. P18

Fandom can indeed involve different experiences, concern different practices and mean different things in various contexts. Even if we share identity as fans of the same media object, my fandom may be experienced as something very different from yours. If fandom is not a singular entity, though, why do fans of the same object have the same interests? Also, why do fans of different objects behave in such similar ways? An ideal theory would be calibrated to shared experiences, sufficiently simple and internally consistent. P19

The word 'consumption' indicates participation in a commercial process, but since 'to consume means to digest and to exhaust it also implies a kind of using up. We can therefore separate two intricate meanings for the same word: to be part of 'economic' consumption means to participate in a financial transaction as a buyer, while to 'culturally' consume is to meaningfully examine a particular media product. P20

In some senses, media fans resemble ideal brand consumers: they snap up the latest thing, buy extra merchandise, participate in promotions, join official fan clubs and build collections (Cavicchi 1998, 62). They form a particularly stable market. If fans are the target consumers for new products and franchises, they are also niche markets that represent the residue of a culture first facilitated by mass marketing (Hills 2002a, 45). The 80-20 rule says that 20 percent of the audience (i.e. fans) create 80 percent of the profits (Jenkins 2008, 72). Indeed, their acceptance is seen to be an organic measure of the triumph of many media products and is integral to promotion:
"Fan consumers are no longer viewed as eccentric irritants, but rather as loyal consumers to be created, where possible, or otherwise to be courted through scheduling practices' (Hills 2002a, 36). Fandom does not escape or resist commodity culture. Instead consumption facilitates fans' contact with media products. P21

However, to see fandom as primarily about consumption is to forget, first, that fans often like things for free, and, second, that they are always more than consumers. They are more than buyers and their transactions are pursued with a cultural interest that goes beyond merely practicing the process of buying. An interesting example of this is provided by Tom McCourt and Patrick Burkart (2007) who show how music fans need online discussion spaces that are greater than anything that customer relationship management systems can provide. Fans are more than consumers because they have especially strong emotional attachments to their objects and they use them to create relationships with both their heroes and with each other (Ferris & Harris 2011, 13). They can be distinguished by their off-by-heart knowledge of their text and their expertise both about it and any associated material (see Brooker 2002, 31; Gray 2010). They are always already consumers- as we all are - but they necessarily have more roles than that (Hills 2002a, 27). Fans are networkers, collectors, tourists, archivists, curators, producers and more. P21

Agency is the ability of individual people to act and behave in ways that make a difference to wider society. Booth's idea that fans operate a parallel economy of sharing when they can is useful because it shows a moment of agency when fans are motivated to help others to experience their favourite texts, not necessarily for anyone's financial gain. What we can therefore say, perhaps, is that fans will often talk about their connections to mediated phenomena, but - at least in speech if not in practice - they are rarely enthusiastic advocates of economic consumption perse. They may have discovered their interests through it. They may sometimes accept it as a necessary means of acquiring the experiences, making the connections or providing the benefits of media resource ownership that they desire. Yet they do not enact the process for its own sake or enter into it with an innate passion for it alone. Rather, the non-commercial nature of fan culture is, for many fans, one of its key characteristics: they are engaged in a labour of love (Jenkins 2008, 180) and if they produce or promote media culture, it is often on a not-for-profit basis.
For this reason, several researchers have understood fan exchange as a gift economy.' P23

What we can say is that fandom is often pursued as a hobby, but it has elements of passionate identification that take it beyond a mere pastime and make it part of the identity of the individual. P24

Grossberg's one carefully distinguishes fandom from ideological mass persuasion like politics or organized religion. Nobody likes to believe that they are ideologically manipulated. Fans say that they 'love' their heroes. While they may have experiences and feelings that are different from non-fans, they are not fundamentalists or zealots. They seem enjoyably fascinated with their own passions. Yet, upon closer inspection the idea of fandom as a particular type of identification or connection has more issues than one may think. Cornel Sandvoss (2005a, 6) has argued that definitions of fandom centred around emotional intensity are poor because fans do not always self-classify based on their emotional intensity. Because media genres like horror conventionally celebrate knowledge over emotion, some dedicated fans may fail to self-identify as they do not display the required intensity of commitment (Hills 2002a, xv). Some forms of genre-based and collecting-orientated forms of fandom are associated with an early peak of emotion that tends to change and give way to different, more intellectual and
"cooler' forms of passion,? Also emotional intensity cannot be scientifically measured. Just as there are floating audience members who lack dedication but nevertheless self-identify as fans, so there are emotionally engaged consumers who can shun the label. Rather than isolating an objective category. perhaps we need to see identifying as one of the central personal and cultural processes of fandom. At some initial point the fan has to deeply connect with, and love - or at least be fascinated by - the object of their interest. P25

First, despite the myth of 100 percent dedication, most fans are fascinated with a variety of different artists or media products. Daniel Cavicchi noted that most of the fans who self-identified as Bruce Springsteen followers listen to Springsteen's music 30-50 percent of the time, between two and four hours a day (1998, 113-14). More significantly, genre fans may watch or hear a particular text just once and still claim to be dedicated. Maybe we should therefore examine other practices. Fans are theorists and expert critics. P26

Community and performance
This ability to transform personal reaction into social interaction, spectatorial culture into participatory culture, is one of the central characteristics of fandom. One becomes a 'fan' not by being a regular viewer of a particular program but by translating that viewing into some kind of cultural activity, by sharing feelings and thoughts about program content with friends, by joining a 'community' of other fans who share common interests. P27

What all the definitions of fandom discussed so far have missed out is its highly personal, experiential, inner dimension. To become a fan is to find yourself with an emotional conviction about a specific object. As a fan himself, Daniel Cavicchi has emphasized this dimension in his own definitions. He explains, 'Fandom is not a bounded entity to be discovered and commented on, or a problem to be questioned and answered; it is a complex, private yet shared, ongoing experience' (1998, 18). This is important to Cavicchi, because many - perhaps most - popular academic theories have seen the self as a set of social relationships and denied the validity of the autonomous individual.
To put it another way, fans' heartfelt convictions are missing in action from cultural theory, relegated as unimportant compared to processes of economic or sociological interaction. For Cavicchi, 'On the whole, fandom is not some particular thing one has or does. Fandom is a process of being; it is the way one is'. P30

Fans are, for example, often stereotyped as 'a group insistent on making meaning from materials others have characterized as trivial and worthless’. P38

Perhaps the most important charge on the list of stereotypes unearthed by Jenkins was (g) that fans could not tell their fantasies from reality. A pair of terms from the philosophy of knowledge are worth introducing here: ontology and epistemology. Ontologists examine systems of knowledge to see how they conceptualize what there is to know about the world. Epistemology is the study of how people form acceptable knowledge. In relation to fandom, the stereotype of fans as fantasists suggests that they have got it wrong ontologically (in believing that they can fully 'know' a celebrity, if, for example, they find out what he/she ate for breakfast). It suggests that they have also made an epistemological mistake in gathering their knowledge about stars, because they cling to a grave falsehood (the celebrity image) and percerve commercially mediated encounters as reliable sources. The critique of fandom therefore suggests that fans cannot tell fantasy from reality and are on the road to trouble. P41

One response to this is to say that we are all fans now as media audience members and that the distinction no longer matters. An associated perception is that fans were the pioneers who spearheaded the current age of audience participation. Yet if cult film and TV series are increasingly organized as elaborate franchises, if media products are orchestrated to provide a greater depth of cultural stimulation, if box sets and streaming Websites allow any of us to watch our favourite episodes again - and if viewers are encouraged to leave comments online (see Gorton 2009, 40-1) - does that not automatically make everyone a fan? The distance between media consumption practices may be narrowing, but contemporary culture still marks out an emotional and rhetorical divide between the identities of the fan and the ordinary audience member. Owning a box set does not make one a fan. Neither does watching every episode. There has to be a peaking of fascination inside the individual that is expressed in some way. Furthermore, while fans may have become the talkative poster-children of an era of new media, beyond academia they are still framed as inadequate by significant. sections of society, especially when they pursue particular kinds of interest and objects of attention. P45

Marginalized fandoms
The incident of encountering a male Philadephia Eagles fan] reminded me that a sort-of social hierarchy still existed when it came to 'fandoms', and within the hierarchy sports would always be at the top of the pile while media fandom would be regarded as slightly suspect by the mainstream. There's nothing odd at all about flying your team flag in front of your house, but can you imagine your neighbours reaction if you hoisted up the iconic Doctor Who logo? P45

Another point here is that desire for emotional intimacy has traditionally been socially coded as feminine, so spaces of community in popular culture may conceivably liberate fans who might otherwise have trouble in letting themselves go. P46

Fans can be loving critics, but they have to pur their fannish identity aside if they wish to play the role of the ordinary critic.
Meanwhile, anti-tans, in Gray's sense, are neither fans nor ordinary critics.
Instead they are the inverse of loving critics; as hating critics they are bound up with the text and vehemently complain about it. They have dropped the ordinary critic's embargo against passion because they passionately dislike or even detest the object of their attention. Consequently, rather like the idea of 'anti-matter' in physics, although Gray's label is illuminative - insofar that it points to something formerly invisible in a sociocultural sense - it does not quite grasp. Anti-fans are not inverse fans, but are inverse loving critics. P48

Anti-fans can emerge on a more parochial level if they believe that a new media franchise will usurp the fan base of their favourite show. This can set up mutual antagonisms between different fan bases, because fans of populist phenomena can believe that if their community loses size then it might be in danger of being forgotten. Doctor Who, for example, had run on British television from 1963 onwards while Star Trek came later in 1968. In Who fan lore, if you like Doctor Who you are likely to be an anti-fan of Star Trek (Hills 2010b, 55). Similarly, in popular music, press stories often set artists up against each other in supposed battles. Examples here include Elvis Presley against Pat Boone in the 1950s, the Stones against the Beatles in the 1960s, Guns N° Roses against Bon Jovi in the 1980s, and Blur against Oasis in the 1990s. While such oppositional pairings create news copy by highlighting important distinctions in the masculinity or cultural orientation of each pair of contenders, what such music battle stories - or scif contests, for that matter-forget is that ordinary fans frequentiy like both contenders and may well be dedicated fans of both of them. P49

if ordinary people use the signs and meanings of cultural products in ways unintended by media producers, then those people participate in popular culture. On the other hand, if the audience members accept the signs and meanings offered by the industry, then they participate only in mass culture. P63

fans and producers both, to a different extent, have power over the social construction of meaning and their interests can sometimes conflict with no easy victory in sight. However, De Certeau hypothesized isolated readers who were separated from the practice of writing; Jenkins (1992, 45) realized that fans operated communally and could make their own fanzines, novels, art or music. Unlike de Certeau, he believed he should not just theorize readers' activities but also document them. P67

At one extreme, some cultural producers take a charitable approach to fan creativity. Will Wright, who created The Sims game in 2000, did not assert copyright over an unofficial Website called 'The Mall of the Sims'. Instead he just let it happen and even courted the fans, by saying, 'We are competing with other properties for these creative individuals'. This is significant as The Sims became one of the most successful games franchises ever (171). Other producers have aimed to bring fan creativity under their wing, as Lucastim did with Star Wars (Jenkins 1992, 30-1). After the media controversy over Warner's quashing of Harry Potter fan creativity, the corporation decided to collaborate with and deputize fans (Jenkins 2008, 196). Aided by shifts in digital technology, media producers are therefore increasingly recognizing that fan cultures represent an alternative rather than oppositional community (Mihelich & Papineau 2005, 184). P74

'Worshipping a celebrity does not make you dysfunctional, but it does put you at risk of being so. There is this progression of behaviours, and if you start, we don't know what's going to stop you! Writers who say fandom is dangerous often argue that particular individuals in fan cultures are vulnerable since each fan can develop intense personal feelings of obsession to a point where he/she experiences something strong and irrational. Obsessed fans supposedly retreat into social isolation, have 'narcissistic linking fantasies" and become overly fixated on their star.
If the fan's attempts to communicate with the celebrity go unrequited - or if the celebrity challenges the image that has been constructed of them - the obsessed follower's immense emotional investment can supposedly cause them to enter a resentful rage and to release their anger by attacking or murdering their hero. Is this really about warding off the beast within, or is it about celebrity psychiatrists courting the media by pathologizing fandom? P87

Fan practices are frequently more about comfort, relaxation and pleasure than they are about frustration with unavailable intimacy. Of course, admirers may wish to communicate their feelings or to meet their star - just for the thrill - but it is important to realize that they already feel boosted by their engagement. As Cavicchi reported:
Media critics consider fans abnormal or dangerous; however, I have found that my fandom for various musical performers has, instead, gotten me through many tough times over the years and has been the source of many friendships, including my relationship with my wife. (1998, 8)
According to sociologists Kerry Ferris and Scott Harris, 'Fans differ from ordinary consumers of fame because they form especially strong emotional attachments to the objects of their interest, and they can use those attachments as the stepping-stone both to relationships with other fans and to relationships with the famous themselves’. P98/99

Fandom begins when we identify something of great interest to us. it is driven by personal connection and fascination and it can become a kind of for intimacy with a famous person. It is also a process where personal passion and energy are productively focused. This does not mean that fandom is inherently about obsession, however. Instead, the term exploits fascination as a way to pathologize fandom as always vulnerable to imbalance and excess, always potentially tipping over into something inappropriate and dangerous.
Commentators who see fandom as excessive implicitly contrast it to more restricted and civilized" forms of behaviour. They confuse a social role with a personal predisposition; perhaps we can say that individuals can be obsessive, but roles are just roles and do not have the agency to obsess. To attribute that agency to roles is, in this case, to say that fandom marks out our pervasive social anxiety about losing our individuality and independence. In some ways, obsession is therefore really another way to discuss possession. Taking this a step further, since fan dedication sometimes boils down to trumping others' knowledge, media collections, or tales of intimacy with a highly-valued star, we can say that the obsession/possession discourse may well reflect the external assumption that extreme fandom is a trap in which individuals fall when they attempt to elevate their low self-esteem by competing against others. P102/103 

Mark Chapman is a real person whose ugly andspointless crime meant that he has been denied parole for over a decade. The monstrous deranged fan' role is something he has never fully inhabited, however, because, upon inspection symbolic resonance in marking a shift from the anti-materialist 1960s to the offered evidence of a social fascination with stalking that indirectly critiqued the vacuity of contemporary celebrity culture. In an era where seemingly undeserving glitterati from Paris Hilton so Victoria Beckham found fame just for being themselves, and where Celebrity Big Brother (2001-) and its variants made the rejection of celebrities into a spectator sport, stalking was symbolically refurbished as a fulfilment of collective fantasy. Capitalizing on the sixth occasion that Chapman was denied parole for his crime, echoing Lady Gaga's album, the Salon journalist Mary Elizabeth Williams (2010) called Chapman a 'fame monster. P112/113

Fandom is, however, often experienced as an emotional activity. Emotions are not just physical disturbances of the body: they follow from beliefs and thoughts. In theory, psychoanalysis may help to create a more emotionally engaged depiction of individual fans. Therefore to talk about fandom we may need to keep both individual psychology and its cultural context in motion. P114

it is important to understand that fans recognize their own fandom as an aspect of their personal identities, and that they can engage with stars or auteurs in ways that feel intensely personal.
Fan researchers have tended to focus on agency and activity, and neglected structure and object (93). Is there something inside each fan, then, that organizes his or her connection to a hero? P115

One avenue opened by the idea is to see fandom as a kind of safe haven for the knocks that life can throw at each of us. Some fans recognize that fractions of the fan base find vicarious comfort and escape in following a star. As Sandvoss explains:
Fandom provides one of most stable eggs in the [self-esteem] basket
••.in this sense fandom is not an articulation of inner needs and drives, but is itself constitutive of the self. Being a fan in this sense reflects and constructs the self. P119

Media fans are just people. Like anyone else, they can be rational, biased, stubborn, critical, tired, liberal or open-minded. One of the central differences between fans and other people, however, is that they have experienced a meaningfully different feeling to others and cannot always rationally explain why. Researchers have described this as a kind of self-absent quality. P123/124

One woman, for instance, discussed how she discovered several artists such as Joni Mitchell at the same time as her sister, and she felt a sense of 'female camaraderie' about them (1998, 180). This kind of camaraderie inspires people to explore their siblings' record collections as a form of peer identification, whether at the time or later in nostalgic reverie. P127

The acquisition of taste is thus a subtle game of one-upmanship that each of us (perhaps unknowingly) plays with our closest neighbours in order to climb, or at least keep our place in, the social system. Taste is therefore a means we use to competitively classify ourselves as social beings. P130