# Jai Notes

It’s worth noting from the outset that this *promise,* whether Jai or any artist for that matter, really is beholden to deliver. Sure, you can argue that any artist in any medium that freely makes their work available, that continues to ask fans or simply patrons to engage with have to uphold their end of the bargain by maintaining some degree of something at some point (See: Kayne West fans having to continue stand behind their master or Frank Ocean fans who will attempt to excuse any behaviour as high art) but really, when we really boil it down, who do they owe and what?

That promise started, likely even bemusedly to him at the time, about XXX years ago with the emergence of BTSTU (Demo). We’re not here to talk about the lineage of his career, lord knows enough has been chronicled and archived as to the artist’s movements and tactics in which to preserve the mystery and genius. Some accepting quite simply that the man has been bestowed with divine talent and some, rather more critically, second guessing every move as a vacuous and calculated marketing approach to keep an audience salivating for every morsel.

 

The artist declined at the time to take part, citing that although they were of course aware of Jai’s music, they didn’t consider him an influence. There perhaps was a few Jai Paul signatures in the artist’s work and more likely we probably told ourselves in some self proclaimed intelligence that we wanted to disassociate from the crowd and champion our artist’s own originality. Fair to conclude in hindsight we might have had some delusions of grandeur and should have participated. 

Not enough output to fail (this isn’t negative). 

Haven’t had an opportunity to explore ideas. 

Not needing to develop in plain sight. 

Paul Institute – an opportunity to flex creative muscles without needing to fully put themselves on the line. But such is the ongoing legacy of Jai, those clearly talented artists, while not entirely 

There was a time before BTSTU and and a time after, and oh boy don’t we know it. 

Has there been an instance where Jai Paul has said he’d do something and not deliver? Did he ask to be this influential? 

Tweet about Jai being 10 years late. Good humour but [https://twitter.com/asiandan/status/1651051455032221700?s=46&t=vqrKf2IngtMq3xdejhkEFw](https://twitter.com/asiandan/status/1651051455032221700?s=46&t=vqrKf2IngtMq3xdejhkEFw)

Backlash has a tendency to follow hype like a shadow, and that hype opens doors very quickly. It creates a momentum that the music industry more often than not rushes to capitalise upon, cries of “make hay while the sun shines” ringing out in meeting rooms from London to LA.