# Jai Paul: Delivering on a Promise

I’m not talking about whether he would turn up to his first-ever live show, at Coachella no less. It’s more a simple fact that what started in 2010 with the game-changing BTSTU (demo), Jai Paul is still creating firsts for himself and fans, those that have been waiting patiently on the sidelines when most could have reasonably assumed he’d taken his lot and disappeared, a great open-ended ‘what could have been.’

Now though, this time it feels different. This time it feels he’s taken a greater risk. He’s dared to give fans what they’ve been asking for, no doubt well aware that when you’ve created a blueprint to the lengths of Jai’s influence, that risk can undo even the greatest of myths. 

That after all this time Jai Paul has broken new ground by playing his first live show at one of the most prominent festivals in the world, before say, making an official music video, is the measure of an artist who is very much operating on his own terms. He’s now played live more than he’s done interviews. He’s telling fans to hand themselves over to the idea and after 13 years, we can be confident he’s right. Now, had his plan always been to play his first live show 12 years after the official release of his first single? probably not. It likely also didn’t include having his working debut album leaked on his behalf either, and not only a leak but a transactional one with its £7 Bandcamp price tag. He wasn’t the first and won’t be the last to suffer their work being prematurely distributed but in the case of Jai Paul, however, someone who had purposefully curated themselves with privacy and mystique, it felt even more criminally intrusive.

Given it was being sold on Bandcamp, arguably a fairly niche platform for independent music at the time albeit a burgeoning one led some circles to contest that it was another clever marketing technique, semi-befitting of an artist who has always been unconventional. Was the leak a result of a fan who felt they were doing those like them a service? Or a chancer who knew full well the power they held with the simple keystrokes of “upload” and  “publish”? 

As a fan, a true dyed-in-the-wool, name-my-first-born-after obsessive, blind loyalty will double down. Could that fandom have stretched to justifying behaviour that leaking Jai Paul’s music was out of an act of love (had it not been for the leak’s financial requirement)? Cult like fandom will excuse anything, you only have to observe Frank Ocean fans fiercely defending what he does and doesn’t do to witness objectivity flying out the window. 

There’s few artists that inspire as much frenzy as Jai Paul, and not just within the confines of Twitter and Reddit fandom. Almost every review of the Coachella performances and subsequent New York shows is preceded with three obligatory paragraphs on how we arrived here. A Wiki entry for the uninitiated, no doubt. And in dog years of the internet some readers would be forgiven for asking “*who?*”. Now, no one is above criticism, if you put art into the world, audience participation is what brings it to life. What’s evident in these reviews and inspired think-pieces is the very expectation and promise that Jai Paul is pressured to live up to. I’m perhaps illustrating him to be some kind of trembling fawn, well aware that if he was the overwhelmingly shy and retiring type we believe him to be, Coachella probably wouldn’t have been his first choice of stage to debut his live show. He knows it too, [apologising](https://twitter.com/asiandan/status/1651051455032221700) for being *“10 years and 30 minutes late”* while taking the stage. The point here is that we can’t help ourselves, such is our appetite to see what he’s got and what he’s going to do next. We can’t help but set the pedestal way up high. We’ve perhaps thought this day would never come and in doing so, we have crystalised an image in our minds of a Jai Paul that is flawless and untouchable. 

I might not sound it but I AM happy to see the reviews, the think-pieces, the comment board and scrolling-feed fandom having more to discuss in actual real-time. But it’s less about what’s being said and more about how we’re saying it. Almost everything comes with a precursor of a precedent being set on his behalf. Some years ago I was working with an artist who was approached by Dazed about a [piece](https://www.dazeddigital.com/music/article/37374/1/how-jai-paul-changed-the-sound-of-pop-with-just-two-songs) they were writing on Jai Paul and his *“legacy”* for a series called Under The Influence. The article in question turned out to be a thoroughly well written and comprehensive piece, a real deep dive that does a lot of justice to Jai Paul and the impact his music was having on a generation of new artists. 

What struck me at the time was the loaded word *“legacy.”* Yes seven years had passed between BTSTU and the Dazed piece but “*legacy*”? It felt like such a strong word for someone, which at this point had only officially released two singles and of course, been subject to the leak. There’d been no live shows. No music videos. A solitary interview fittingly with to Dazed back in 2011. He hadn’t been afforded the opportunity to fail and by no means is this proposed negatively. Failure is an important part of producing art, overcoming it a lesson everyone can learn so much more from but by this point as far as all were concerned, Jai Paul was operating on a 100% success rate. The article’s headline said it all, “*how Jai Paul changed the sound of pop music with just two songs*.” I’m not immune to hyperbole but jeez.

In a recent *Jai Paul 101* [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=12rISbJOWcY) from Resident Advisor the narrator asks whether we’re witnessing *“one of the greatest comebacks by an artist that barely made it in the first place?”*. To what end are we defining “*made it*”? Is it a “*comeback*” or simply an artist in control of their own progress? For every blog-written and podcast-spoken word that heightens the plinth the statue will eventually adorn, are we inadvertently creating something our would-be heroes can’t live up to? While many artists would kill for the attention showered upon Jai Paul, in many instances it’s easy to create such an elevated expectation that can also lead to our favourite artist’s undoing.

The collaborative Paul Institute with his brother A.K. Paul no doubt satisfied a creative outlet for Jai in absence of him crossing the threshold of releasing more solo music. And even then a cursory read of articles about any of the Paul Institute’s releases almost can’t contain their excitement at the opportunity to write the word’s “*Jai Paul*” and “*new music*” in the same sentence. Hell, many of those news stories have Jai’s name in the headline while the releasing artist in question is relegated down to the opening paragraph. A less vacuous form of clickbait I’ll accept, we all know how PR works but once again, the Jai Paul shadow is cast long and wide.

Jasmine hit us with as much impact as BTSTU. The leak filled a void and *broke the internet,* with some inspired [investigative journalism](https://www.crackintheroad.com/music/21107-feature-finding-jai-paul/), on a Sunday morning no less. Rightly or wrongly like so many I was right there on Bandcamp handing over my money, prepared to ask the question of legitimacy later. The articles, the tidbits, the rumours, we’ll take it all. This would typically feed the beast, artists and their teams responding accordingly; booking tours, pressing more vinyl in all the colours of the rainbow – the appetite is there to be capitalised and everything monetised. In the case of Jai Paul however it worked inversely. Undoubtedly an artist’s music leaking in an unfinished state is a traumatic experience, for someone as seemingly-reclusive as Jai Paul we know how much further it set him back and as a result, we all lost out.

So now, with his first ever live shows under his belt, let’s learn from our mistakes. It’s been thirteen years since BTSTU dominated music blog culture and sent the music industry into a tail-spin. The world has turned a lot since then and we’re still here hanging off every word. If Jai Paul’s music wasn’t as groundbreaking and innovative as it was at the time we’d have lost interest a long time ago. There was quite simply a time before BTSTU and a time after.

Jai Paul doesn’t owe us anything but I’m hoping he is living up to a promise he made to himself, to maintain a freedom to do whatever he wants and on a timeline that suits him. “*No*” is a powerful word and his employment of it has built such an incredible allowance for him to enjoy an artistic freedom. Did Jai already leave a legacy? Are we going to allow him to add more to it by getting the hell out of the way? Our desire for instant gratification as such means that these days artists develop in plain sight, we’re quick to move on when they can’t live up to our ongoing expectations from one thing to the next. Let’s proceed with caution, allow him to create more firsts and ultimately be the architect of his own promise. 

---