# TikTok and Its Weather Patterns

To quote Agent Dale Cooper as he entered the town of Twin Peaks at 11:30am on February 24th, 1989:

> “*Fifty-four degrees on a slightly overcast day. Weatherman said rain. If you could get paid that kind of money for being wrong sixty percent of the time, it’d beat working.”*
> 

Let’s discuss TikTok; trends, virality, influencers and their agencies. The weatherman’s success rate, or failure as remarked by Agent Cooper is by general rule of thumb of the music industry pretty damn good (like his coffee). Granted we likely know more about the constantly changing global weather patterns than we do of TikTok’s algorithm (the former has access to satellites after all) but a 40% success rate!? As divinely intelligent as Agent Dale Cooper was he would have needed to lower his expectations in 2023 where in the music industry we’re accustomed to consider 20%, well, really very good. Mailing list open rate? Track save rate? Socials post engagement? If you’re operating around 20% then there’s a round of approving nods in the planning meeting. 

It’s [reported](TikTok%20and%20Its%20Weather%20Patterns%206a3e5f204fd84520b4d773d997e383c5.md) that TikTok has over 1 billion global active users. Some of it’s most popular hashtags include “#music” with over 510 billion combined views and “#viral” with over 16 trillion views. In 2022 it [reportedly](https://www.statista.com/statistics/1305708/tiktok-ad-revenue/) earned $5.04 billion USD in advertising revenue. It’s less the size of the platform and more its penetration, it still stands behind Facebook and Instagram in total users. But, when you have stats such as 28% of 12-15 year olds in the UK get their news from TikTok, users in the US make use of the app at least 8 times a day with each session averaging 5 minutes, and one in five American Gen Z and millennials use the platform, its appeal for marketing artists is undeniable. 

[TikTok claimed](https://newsroom.tiktok.com/en-gb/year-on-tiktok-2022-uk-music) that during 2022, 10 of the 12 number ones on the UK Official Singles Chart had a viral moment on the platform, and 13 out of the 14 Billboard Hot 100 number ones were driven by significant trends on TikTok. Just [observe TikTok UK’s](https://newsroom.tiktok.com/en-gb/year-on-tiktok-2022-uk-music#:~:text=Our%20Breakthrough%20Artists%20of%202022) list of Breakthrough Artists of 2022; Wet Leg, piri & tommy, Venbee, Fred again.., FLO, Stepz and Cat Burns among others. 

All of this to say that there’s a reason it’s demanding the lion’s share of attention in preparing and planning a release. The obstacle is how in the hell do you formulate an impactful strategy that makes use of the huge viral potential held within? What you have is a window to over one-eighth of the world’s population, where more than 1 billion videos are viewed every single day, all the while navigating what appears to be an inconsistent algorithm. Does it sound like chaos yet? You’d be forgiven for giving up entirely, plenty do, or paying your way to a solution. 

TikTok didn’t invent the influencer. YouTube facilitated a lucrative business centred around makeup tutorials, Minecraft gamers, reactionary videos and the all important unboxing of hard to find Nike Air Jordan’s and Supreme collaborations. Instagram streamlined the route to influencer stardom, arguably lowering the production values but aiding the ability to produce shorter-form content and therefore increase post frequency.

TikTok’s success over its rivals is largely attributed to it’s superior algorithm, a feature that democratises the platform’s experience for the creator and super-serves the user, conveniently surfacing content they wouldn’t typically see. Aside from well known influencers signing up on launch TikTok quickly generated native first influencers, again attributed to the democratically powerful For You Page as the amplifier. The #FYP opportunity to go viral mixed with snippets of songs and measured in video creations supercharged a song’s potential to reach new fans and the ensuing halo effect it can have upon streaming, in-turn elevating a song up the charts or at the very least contributing millions of streams. It was [reported](https://www.businessinsider.com/how-tiktok-is-changing-the-music-industry-marketing-discovery-2021-7?r=US&IR=T) in 2021 that up to 67% of TikTok users were more likely to go on to listen to songs on streaming services after hearing the audio on the platform. 

In Derek Thompson’s comprehensive and insightful book ‘Hit Makers: How Things Become Popular’ (noticeable by its absence but written and published prior to TikTok’s dominance as we know it now), he states that social virality doesn’t really exist in the true sense of the word. We don’t pass from one-to-one but rather from one-to-many. It’s not one person speaking to two people, those two people then speaking to another two people and so on. Instead he argues that the result of virality we’ve experienced in the social age is a one-to-thousand megaphone. It’s being broadcast in a way a post from mega influencer Charli D’Amelio would project to her 150m TikTok followers. That’s the extreme end but the point to illustrate is that when we talk about *going viral,* the tipping point typically comes from someone with an established presence and following.

Thompson’s examples are numerous and there are plenty relating to music such as the acceleration of Carly Rae Jepson’s hit Call Me Maybe, attributed in large part to Justin Bieber posting a video of himself and friends dancing along to the song.

Taking this principle it would seem that the influencer approach makes perfect sense: pick someone with a huge number of followers, pay them to use a song on a piece of content and hey presto, the song has been broadcast and you have a hit on your hands. That’s of course an oversimplification but a strategy overly employed in the not too recent past. More often than not in these instances the song is secondary to the content, analogous to the lean back listening of a chill playlist on your chosen streaming service. However, once we experienced the inconsistent success rate of a song breaking out beyond the influencer’s content then it became far more about the quality and context of that content we were attaching the song to. The plight became how do we attach the lyrics to the content? Ultimately, how do we design a trend so specific to the song that when someone posts a video emulating that trend, the song IS the trend?

Trends are where TikTok has successfully pivoted away from it’s rivals. The knowledge of where, when and how these trends start is the silver bullet. These trends can be started on the principle of a one-to-many broadcast but arguably are more likely initiated under the circumstances of the more organic one-to-few. There are indeed brands starting trends and TikTok focusing on specific hashtags on a weekly basis but how many of these become the birth of a viral hit on the platform? I have no doubt TikTok is equipped with such advanced velocity indicators that identify trends in real time but again, it’s working to identify the trend as it is emerging, it’s not dictating the trend’s creation. 

Cue influencer agencies. They have become gatekeepers, consolidating influencers with followers ranging in the millions through to nano- and micro-influencers, profiles with only a few thousand followers. The latter, if engaged in healthy enough numbers can fulfil the one-to-few methodology of creating the basic seeds of viral momentum. Or so we’re told. Legitimate agencies are staffed with intelligent people and tech, those who have an understanding of the platform’s dynamics and who are intimately in-tune with what’s working and what isn’t. 

A viable influencer campaign as recent as 12 months ago was to engage on a one-to-many basis, targeting big numbers regardless of context of the song and how it was being used. Simply go big and increase the chances of engagement. With the endless influencers on offer and competitive nature on the platform the circumstances for success were few and far between. A tweaked approach, as we’ll see later, is to position an open brief to the influencers; here’s the song, have the creators run with their own ideas. This method cleverly feels far more democratic for both client and influencer, an understanding that if the influencer’s post(s) don’t deliver to the expectations of the client then the issue lies with the brief. On the other hand the client adopting the opposite stance might feel the influencer shouldn’t have accepted the brief if they couldn’t deliver engaging enough content. The agency in middle? Welcome to TikTok. 

It’s worth noting that a song’s viral momentum on the platform doesn’t need to be solely attributed to a trend, Sam Smith’s recent global hit Unholy began from them posting a video of the song being played in the studio. The song did inspire a [trend](https://www.tiktok.com/@samsmith/video/7137026882574372102) fairly quickly with fans, helpfully attached so specifically to the song that its hashtags were literally #unholy. With Sam’s 4m+ followers at the time it’s easy to identify this initial momentum to be the result of a one-to-many broadcast, however, it’s widely acknowledged that posts only reach a small percentage of a profile’s followers. This isn’t specific to TikTok, we’re well aware of Instagram, Facebook and Twitter holding a profile’s followers to ransom. Mix in an algorithm and ever changing open market of users and predictability will evade the best of us. This is the issue. This is where we find ourselves. Disagreements abound and a disproportionate share of time and energy is applied to artist development based on an unpredictable outcomes of social platform algorithms, where we really should acknowledge more openly that we’re trading on pure luck more than we’d care to admit.

Trends on the platform do however follow a familiar understanding of popularity; in simple terms it’s that popularity begets popularity. It’s popular because it’s popular. Observe the top 10 songs of an artist’s Spotify profile page, these will likely continue to be the most popular songs. It’s these songs that the less initiated fan will listen to and any new curious listener will lean towards when getting started. Likewise with TikTok, not everyone posting a video to a specific trend where the song is part of that trend is doing it because they like the song, their motivations are to belong, to be part of a movement, generally speaking, part of something popular. As Derek Thompson would state, popularity is the product.

This example of popularity is illustrated when a song’s growth through video creations isn’t tethered to a trend. Canadian artist Nemahsis’ beautiful debut single ‘what if i took it off for you?’ peaked at 850K creations on TikTok in May 2022, the song was elevated thanks to it’s inclusion in TikTok’s #Arabmusic campaign. The song not being attached to a trend didn’t by any means harm it’s growth on the platform but it became an obvious victim of the *popular because it’s popular* methodology, evident at the time where of the top 20 videos using the song, 10 of them had muted the song’s audio. The motivations of the user’s posting a video using the song were clear; the algorithm was favouring content using this audio, therefore it will favour my video, making me visible. If popularity is the product then music is relegated to the by-product.

It’s fair to conclude that designing a trend that can truly scale, whether artist, manager, label or agency, even TikTok itself, is by no means easy. It’s not impossible but the success rate of those that truly reach the heights to aid supercharged momentum are few and far between measured against those that inspire a few posts yet hardly gather much speed. This isn’t to say you don’t try but an adopting an always-be-testing approach, an more relaxed openness to allow for circumstances to align and for luck to strike.

In a recent breakdown on Music Ally’s Behind the Single series focussing on PinkPantheress and Ice Spice’s [Boy’s A Liar Part 2](https://musically.com/2023/04/05/behind-the-single-pinkpantheress-ice-spice-boys-a-liar-pt-2/), the strategy outlines a number of trigger points. A familiar practice for artists is the teasing of multiple songs in all manner of states of demo and completion. In this case PinkPantheress initially began teasing a snippet of Boy’s A Liar (part one) in October 2022. The observation as such that the response was “exploding” on- and off-platform. However, the label played a longer game than most, waiting until the track’s sound hit 10,000 creations before they even decided if the song had a *“real capacity for growth and one they wanted to move forward with.”* The official sound followed and when at 50,000 creations they released the song on November 30th. According to the report as creations continued to grow it was then that they engaged with influencers. PinkPantheress isn’t short on followers but it’s telling how high the creations rose before it triggered an official sound, an actual release and only then an engagement with influencers. 

In another Music Ally Behind the Single breakdown, LF System’s hit [Afraid To Feel](https://musically.com/2022/10/19/behind-the-single-lf-system-2/) is analysed and the work employed between Warner and TikTok agency, Zebr represents an approach that was initiated far earlier than Boy’s A Liar, in this case right from release. For £5,000 Zebr’s ‘Challenge’ feature was utilised, engaging micro and mid-tier influencers where they only get paid when they hit certain “performance milestones.” The approach to content creations is fluid rather than to a strict brief. This makes sense as we’ve discussed, if you’re only in week one or two of your release and with no organic momentum already on the platform, why be too specific? Better to lean into the chaos and see what lands, if something moves then refocus your content strategy and double down. Warner went on to engage another four agencies alongside Zebr with strategies varying from celebrity influencers (those one-to-many), sports and gaming influencers as well as those attending festivals where the song would naturally find an audience.

Not all TikTok trends are created equal, LF System’s Afraid To Feel hit 120.5K creations at the time it reached #1 in the UK official singles chart. David Kushner’s current single ‘Daylight’, so far peaking at #2 in the UK had 290K. Libianca’s ‘People’ also reaching a UK chart peak at #2 was on 1.5m video creations. When Sam Smith’s Unholy hit #1 on the US Billboard Hot 100 it had clocked up 960K video creations. No surprise that all of the above varied in their durations from pre-release teasing through to their respective chart peaks. Perhaps obvious but it’s worth noting that a lot more work goes into achieving a chart position than simply a few hundred-thousand creations on TikTok. As we’ve pointed out though, there’s rarely a song in the charts that hasn’t found some presence and significant momentum on TikTok prior to achieving those chart positions. 

So what’s the best approach? What strategy do we adopt? Shall we do what we can and run with a wait and see strategy? Engage an influencer agency prior to release? Begin influencer outreach on or after release? What number of views, likes and creations is the right trigger point? What should we expect to get for £5,000 and is that enough budget if we’re to engage multiple agencies? Will the song have it’s own sustainability on the platform beyond the creator’s contributions? At the end of all of this have we considered what success actually looks like? is there a magic number we’ll be satisfied with?  

There is life on TikTok outside of trends and virality. There’s rewards for developing and connecting with fans, with merch and ticketing integrations rumoured to be on the horizon, it doesn’t all have to be centred around a fixation on a song having a viral moment or millions of views.

While there’s best practices out there to adhere to it feels now more than ever we’re simply trying to get in the way of luck, hoping the golden hand will land upon us. Plenty are succeeding in spite of TikTok’s dominant share of voice when it comes to artist and release development. We need to encourage and embrace diverse and wide reaching approaches, to be understanding of the difficulties artists have to undertake on the platform, allow room for error and make allowances for our shortcomings. We’re all trying to make sense of the chaos and indeed there are a number of successes, which have been achieved with a semi-firm grip of knowledge in hand. Are we close to operating on an Agent Dale Cooper success rate of 40%? That feels like a stretch as consistency in our understanding and undertaking on the platform eludes us more often than not. It’s unlikely we’ll ever have a silver bullet of clarity ; not artists, not labels, not influencer agencies, not even TikTok. The unpredictability doesn’t appear to be discouraging many because the payoff, as we’ve seen, can be big. The cost of pursuing our TikTok viral dreams, both literally and figuratively needs a greater proportionate amount of consideration when it comes to artist development. 

Editorial playlists on streaming services, radio plays, and press interviews, they all have a gatekeeper in common. When it comes to social media though we’ve been sold an illusion of control, after all, we don’t need to wait for an editor or producer, we can simply post whenever and whatever we like. However, there is a gatekeeper, it's is a sophisticated algorithm that suffers from mood swings that change like the weather.

As an aside, when it launched 20 years ago iTunes unbundled the song from the album. With our increasing focus and reliance on TikTok we’re witnessing the song being unbundled from the artist. We’re having to work harder than ever to ensure that when songs benefit from the virality on offer, it doesn’t get so far away from that we can’t link it back to the original creator; the artist. It’s why we’re all here in the first place after all. 

---